*Yamakavagga: Pairs
#1
manopubbaṅgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā.
manasā ce paduṭṭhena, bhāsati vā karoti vā.
tato naṃ dukkhamanveti, cakkaṃva vahato padaṃ.

Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are all mind-wrought. If with an impure mind a person speaks or acts suffering follows him like the wheel that follows the foot of the ox.
#2
manopubbaṅgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā.
manasā ce pasannena, bhāsati vā karoti vā.
tato naṃ sukhamanveti, chāyāva anapāyinī.

Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are all mind-wrought. If with a pure mind a person speaks or acts happiness follows him like his never-departing shadow.
#3
akkocchi maṃ avadhi maṃ, ajini maṃ ahāsi me.
ye ca taṃ upanayhanti, veraṃ tesaṃ na sammati.

'He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he robbed me.' Those who harbor such thoughts do not still their hatred.
#4
akkocchi maṃ avadhi maṃ, ajini maṃ ahāsi me.
ye ca taṃ nupanayhanti, veraṃ tesūpasammati.

'He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he robbed me.' Those who do not harbor such thoughts still their hatred.
#5
na hi verena verāni, sammantīdha kudācanaṃ.
averena ca sammanti, esa dhammo sanantano.

Hatred is never appeased by hatred in this world. By non-hatred alone is hatred appeased. This is a law eternal.
#6
pare ca na vijānanti, mayamettha yamāmase.
ye ca tattha vijānanti, tato sammanti medhagā.

There are those who do not realize that one day we all must die. But those who do realize this settle their quarrels.
#7
subhānupassiṃ viharantaṃ, indriyesu asaṃvutaṃ.
bhojanamhi cāmattaññuṃ, kusītaṃ hīnavīriyaṃ.
taṃ ve pasahati māro, vāto rukkhaṃva dubbalaṃ.

Just as a storm throws down a weak tree, so does Mara overpower the man who lives for the pursuit of pleasures, who is uncontrolled in his senses, immoderate in eating, indolent, and dissipated.
#8
asubhānupassiṃ viharantaṃ, indriyesu susaṃvutaṃ.
bhojanamhi ca mattaññuṃ, saddhaṃ āraddhavīriyaṃ.
taṃ ve nappasahati māro, vāto selaṃva pabbataṃ.

Just as a storm cannot prevail against a rocky mountain, so Mara can never overpower the man who lives meditating on the impurities, who is controlled in his senses, moderate in eating, and filled with faith and earnest effort.
#9
anikkasāvo kāsāvaṃ, yo vatthaṃ paridahissati.
apeto damasaccena, na so kāsāvamarahati.

Whoever being depraved, devoid of self-control and truthfulness, should don the monk's yellow robe, he surely is not worthy of the robe.
#10
yo ca vantakasāvassa, sīlesu susamāhito.
upeto damasaccena, sa ve kāsāvamarahati.

But whoever is purged of depravity, well-established in virtues and filled with self-control and truthfulness, he indeed is worthy of the yellow robe.
#11
asāre sāramatino, sāre cāsāradassino.
te sāraṃ nādhigacchanti, micchāsaṅkappagocarā.

Those who mistake the unessential to be essential and the essential to be unessential, dwelling in wrong thoughts, never arrive at the essential.
#12
sārañca sārato ñatvā, asārañca asārato.
te sāraṃ adhigacchanti, sammāsaṅkappagocarā.

Those who know the essential to be essential and the unessential to be unessential, dwelling in right thoughts, do arrive at the essential.
#13
yathā agāraṃ ducchannaṃ, vuṭṭhī samativijjhati.
evaṃ abhāvitaṃ cittaṃ, rāgo samativijjhati.

Just as rain breaks through an ill-thatched house, so passion penetrates an undeveloped mind.
#14
yathā agāraṃ suchannaṃ, vuṭṭhī na samativijjhati.
evaṃ subhāvitaṃ cittaṃ, rāgo na samativijjhati.

Just as rain does not break through a well-thatched house, so passion never penetrates a well-developed mind.
#15
idha socati pecca socati, pāpakārī ubhayattha socati.
so socati so vihaññati, disvā kammakiliṭṭhamattano.

The evil-doer grieves here and hereafter; he grieves in both the worlds. He laments and is afflicted, recollecting his own impure deeds.
#16
idha modati pecca modati, katapuñño ubhayattha modati.
so modati so pamodati, disvā kammavisuddhimattano.

The doer of good rejoices here and hereafter; he rejoices in both the worlds. He rejoices and exults, recollecting his own pure deeds.
#17
idha tappati pecca tappati, pāpakārī ubhayattha tappati.
'pāpaṃ me kata'nti tappati, bhiyyo tappati duggatiṃ gato.

The evil-doer suffers here and hereafter; he suffers in both the worlds. The thought, 'Evil have I done,' torments him, and he suffers even more when gone to realms of woe.
#18
idha nandati pecca nandati, katapuñño ubhayattha nandati.
'puññaṃ me kata'nti nandati, bhiyyo nandati suggatiṃ gato.

The doer of good delights here and hereafter; he delights in both the worlds. The thought, 'Good have I done,' delights him, and he delights even more when gone to realms of bliss.
#19
bahumpi ce saṃhita bhāsamāno, na takkaro hoti naro pamatto.
gopova gāvo gaṇayaṃ paresaṃ, na bhāgavā sāmaññassa hoti.

Much though he recites the sacred texts, but acts not accordingly, that heedless man is like a cowherd who only counts the cows of others - he does not partake of the blessings of the holy life.
#20
appampi ce saṃhita bhāsamāno, dhammassa hoti anudhammacārī.
rāgañca dosañca pahāya mohaṃ, sammappajāno suvimuttacitto.
anupādiyāno idha vā huraṃ vā, sa bhāgavā sāmaññassa hoti.

Little though he recites the sacred texts, but puts the Teaching into practice, forsaking lust, hatred, and delusion, with true wisdom and emancipated mind, clinging to nothing of this or any other world - he indeed partakes of the blessings of a holy life.
*Appamadavagga: Heedfulness
#21
appamādo amatapadaṃ, pamādo maccuno padaṃ.
appamattā na mīyanti, ye pamattā yathā matā.

Heedfulness is the path to the Deathless. Heedlessness is the path to death. The heedful die not. The heedless are as if dead already.
#22
evaṃ visesato ñatvā, appamādamhi paṇḍitā.
appamāde pamodanti, ariyānaṃ gocare ratā.

Clearly understanding this excellence of heedfulness, the wise exult therein and enjoy the resort of the Noble Ones.
#23
te jhāyino sātatikā, niccaṃ daḷhaparakkamā.
phusanti dhīrā nibbānaṃ, yogakkhemaṃ anuttaraṃ.

The wise ones, ever meditative and steadfastly persevering, alone experience Nibbana, the incomparable freedom from bondage.
#24
uṭṭhānavato satīmato, sucikammassa nisammakārino.
saññatassa dhammajīvino, appamattassa yasobhivaḍḍhati.

Ever grows the glory of him who is energetic, mindful and pure in conduct, discerning and self-controlled, righteous and heedful.
#25
uṭṭhānenappamādena, saṃyamena damena ca.
dīpaṃ kayirātha medhāvī, yaṃ ogho nābhikīrati.

By effort and heedfulness, discipline and self-mastery, let the wise one make for himself an island which no flood can overwhelm.
#26
pamādamanuyuñjanti, bālā dummedhino janā.
appamādañca medhāvī, dhanaṃ seṭṭhaṃva rakkhati.

The foolish and ignorant indulge in heedlessness, but the wise one keeps his heedfulness as his best treasure.
#27
mā pamādamanuyuñjetha, mā kāmaratisanthavaṃ.
appamatto hi jhāyanto, pappoti vipulaṃ sukhaṃ.

Do not give way to heedlessness. Do not indulge in sensual pleasures. Only the heedful and meditative attain great happiness.
#28
pamādaṃ appamādena, yadā nudati paṇḍito.
paññāpāsādamāruyha, asoko sokiniṃ pajaṃ.
pabbataṭṭhova bhūmaṭṭhe, dhīro bāle avekkhati.

Just as one upon the summit of a mountain beholds the groundlings, even so when the wise man casts away heedlessness by heedfulness and ascends the high tower of wisdom, this sorrowless sage beholds the sorrowing and foolish multitude.
#29
appamatto pamattesu, suttesu bahujāgaro.
abalassaṃva sīghasso, hitvā yāti sumedhaso.

Heedful among the heedless, wide-awake among the sleepy, the wise man advances like a swift horse leaving behind a weak jade.
#30
appamādena maghavā, devānaṃ seṭṭhataṃ gato.
appamādaṃ pasaṃsanti, pamādo garahito sadā.

By Heedfulness did Indra become the overlord of the gods. Heedfulness is ever praised, and heedlessness ever despised.
#31
appamādarato bhikkhu, pamāde bhayadassi vā.
saṃyojanaṃ aṇuṃ thūlaṃ, ḍahaṃ aggīva gacchati.

The monk who delights in heedfulness and looks with fear at heedlessness advances like fire, burning all fetters, small and large.
#32
appamādarato bhikkhu, pamāde bhayadassi vā.
abhabbo parihānāya, nibbānasseva santike.

The monk who delights in heedfulness and looks with fear at heedlessness will not fall. He is close to Nibbana.
*Cittavagga: The Mind
#33
phandanaṃ capalaṃ cittaṃ, dūrakkhaṃ dunnivārayaṃ.
ujuṃ karoti medhāvī, usukārova tejanaṃ.

Just as a fletcher straightens an arrow shaft, even so the discerning man straightens his mind - so fickle and unsteady, so difficult to guard.
#34
vārijova thale khitto, okamokataubbhato.
pariphandatidaṃ cittaṃ, māradheyyaṃ pahātave.

As a fish when pulled out of water and cast on land throbs and quivers, even so is this mind agitated. Hence should one abandon the realm of Mara.
#35
dunniggahassa lahuno, yatthakāmanipātino.
cittassa damatho sādhu, cittaṃ dantaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

Wonderful, indeed, it is to subdue the mind, so difficult to subdue, ever swift, and seizing whatever it desires. A tamed mind brings happiness.
#36
sududdasaṃ sunipuṇaṃ, yatthakāmanipātinaṃ.
cittaṃ rakkhetha medhāvī, cittaṃ guttaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

Let the discerning man guard the mind, so difficult to detect and extremely subtle, seizing whatever it desires. A guarded mind brings happiness.
#37
dūraṅgamaṃ ekacaraṃ, asarīraṃ guhāsayaṃ.
ye cittaṃ saṃyamessanti, mokkhanti mārabandhanā.

Dwelling in the cave (of the heart), the mind, without form, wanders far and alone. Those who subdue this mind are liberated from the bonds of Mara.
#38
anavaṭṭhitacittassa, saddhammaṃ avijānato.
pariplavapasādassa, paññā na paripūrati.

Wisdom never becomes perfect in one whose mind is not steadfast, who knows not the Good Teaching and whose faith wavers.
#39
anavassutacittassa, ananvāhatacetaso.
puññapāpapahīnassa, natthi jāgarato bhayaṃ.

There is no fear for an awakened one, whose mind is not sodden (by lust) nor afflicted (by hate), and who has gone beyond both merit and demerit.
#40
kumbhūpamaṃ kāyamimaṃ viditvā, nagarūpamaṃ cittamidaṃ ṭhapetvā.
yodhetha māraṃ paññāvudhena, jitañca rakkhe anivesano siyā.

Realizing that this body is as fragile as a clay pot, and fortifying this mind like a well-fortified city, fight out Mara with the sword of wisdom. Then, guarding the conquest, remain unattached.
#41
aciraṃ vatayaṃ kāyo, pathaviṃ adhisessati.
chuddho apetaviññāṇo, niratthaṃva kaliṅgaraṃ.

Ere long, alas! this body will lie upon the earth, unheeded and lifeless, like a useless log.
#42
diso disaṃ yaṃ taṃ kayirā, verī vā pana verinaṃ.
micchāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, pāpiyo naṃ tato kare.

Whatever harm an enemy may do to an enemy, or a hater to a hater, an ill-directed mind inflicts on oneself a greater harm.
#43
na taṃ mātā pitā kayirā, aññe vāpi ca ñātakā.
sammāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, seyyaso naṃ tato kare.

Neither mother, father, nor any other relative can do one greater good than one's own well-directed mind.
*Pupphavagga: Blossoms
#44
ko imaṃ pathaviṃ vicessati, yamalokañca imaṃ sadevakaṃ.
ko dhammapadaṃ sudesitaṃ, kusalo pupphamiva pacessati.

Who shall overcome this earth, this realm of Yama and this sphere of men and gods? Who shall bring to perfection the well-taught path of wisdom as an expert garland-maker would his floral design?
#45
sekho pathaviṃ vicessati, yamalokañca imaṃ sadevakaṃ.
sekho dhammapadaṃ sudesitaṃ, kusalo pupphamiva pacessati.

A striver-on-the path shall overcome this earth, this realm of Yama and this sphere of men and gods. The striver-on-the-path shall bring to perfection the well-taught path of wisdom, as an expert garland-maker would his floral design.
#46
pheṇūpamaṃ kāyamimaṃ viditvā, marīcidhammaṃ abhisambudhāno.
chetvāna mārassa papupphakāni, adassanaṃ maccurājassa gacche.

Realizing that this body is like froth, penetrating its mirage-like nature, and plucking out Mara's flower-tipped arrows of sensuality, go beyond sight of the King of Death!
#47
pupphāni heva pacinantaṃ, byāsattamanasaṃ naraṃ.
suttaṃ gāmaṃ mahoghova, maccu ādāya gacchati.

As a mighty flood sweeps away the sleeping village, so death carries away the person of distracted mind who only plucks the flowers (of pleasure).
#48
pupphāni heva pacinantaṃ, byāsattamanasaṃ naraṃ.
atittaññeva kāmesu, antako kurute vasaṃ.

The Destroyer brings under his sway the person of distracted mind who, insatiate in sense desires, only plucks the flowers (of pleasure).
#49
yathāpi bhamaro pupphaṃ, vaṇṇagandhamaheṭhayaṃ.
paleti rasamādāya, evaṃ gāme munī care.

As a bee gathers honey from the flower without injuring its color or fragrance, even so the sage goes on his alms-round in the village.
#50
na paresaṃ vilomāni, na paresaṃ katākataṃ.
attanova avekkheyya, katāni akatāni ca.

Let none find fault with others; let none see the omissions and commissions of others. But let one see one's own acts, done and undone.
#51
yathāpi ruciraṃ pupphaṃ, vaṇṇavantaṃ agandhakaṃ.
evaṃ subhāsitā vācā, aphalā hoti akubbato.

Like a beautiful flower full of color but without fragrance, even so, fruitless are the fair words of one who does not practice them.
#52
yathāpi ruciraṃ pupphaṃ, vaṇṇavantaṃ sugandhakaṃ.
evaṃ subhāsitā vācā, saphalā hoti kubbato.

Like a beautiful flower full of color and also fragrant, even so, fruitful are the fair words of one who practices them.
#53
yathāpi puppharāsimhā, kayirā mālāguṇe bahū.
evaṃ jātena maccena, kattabbaṃ kusalaṃ bahuṃ.

As from a great heap of flowers many garlands can be made, even so should many good deeds be done by one born a mortal.
#54
na pupphagandho paṭivātameti, na candanaṃ tagaramallikā.
satañca gandho paṭivātameti, sabbā disā sappuriso pavāyati.

Not the sweet smell of flowers, not even the fragrance of sandal, tagara, or jasmine blows against the wind. But the fragrance of the virtuous blows against the wind. Truly the virtuous man pervades all directions with the fragrance of his virtue.
#55
candanaṃ tagaraṃ vāpi, uppalaṃ atha vassikī.
etesaṃ gandhajātānaṃ, sīlagandho anuttaro.

Of all the fragrances - sandal, tagara, blue lotus and jasmine - the fragrance of virtue is the sweetest.
#56
appamatto ayaṃ gandho, yvāyaṃ tagaracandanaṃ.
yo ca sīlavataṃ gandho, vāti devesu uttamo.

Faint is the fragrance of tagara and sandal, but excellent is the fragrance of the virtuous, wafting even amongst the gods.
#57
tesaṃ sampannasīlānaṃ, appamādavihārinaṃ.
sammadaññā vimuttānaṃ, māro maggaṃ na vindati.

Mara never finds the path of the truly virtuous, who abide in heedfulness and are freed by perfect knowledge.
#58-59
yathā saṅkāraṭhānasmiṃ, ujjhitasmiṃ mahāpathe.
padumaṃ tattha jāyetha, sucigandhaṃ manoramaṃ.

evaṃ saṅkārabhūtesu, andhabhūte puthujjane.
atirocati paññāya, sammāsambuddhasāvako.

Upon a heap of rubbish in the road-side ditch blooms a lotus, fragrant and pleasing.
Even so, on the rubbish heap of blinded mortals the disciple of the Supremely Enlightened One shines resplendent in wisdom.
*Balavagga: Fools
#60
dīghā jāgarato ratti, dīghaṃ santassa yojanaṃ.
dīgho bālānaṃ saṃsāro, saddhammaṃ avijānataṃ.

Long is the night to the sleepless; long is the league to the weary. Long is worldly existence to fools who know not the Sublime Truth.
#61
carañce nādhigaccheyya, seyyaṃ sadisamattano.
ekacariyaṃ daḷhaṃ kayirā, natthi bāle sahāyatā.

Should a seeker not find a companion who is better or equal, let him resolutely pursue a solitary course; there is no fellowship with the fool.
#62
puttā matthi dhanammatthi, iti bālo vihaññati.
attā hi attano natthi, kuto puttā kuto dhanaṃ.

The fool worries, thinking, 'I have sons, I have wealth.' Indeed, when he himself is not his own, whence are sons, whence is wealth?
#63
yo bālo maññati bālyaṃ, paṇḍito vāpi tena so.
bālo ca paṇḍitamānī, sa ve 'bālo'ti vuccati.

A fool who knows his foolishness is wise at least to that extent, but a fool who thinks himself wise is a fool indeed.
#64
yāvajīvampi ce bālo, paṇḍitaṃ payirupāsati.
na so dhammaṃ vijānāti, dabbī sūparasaṃ yathā.

Though all his life a fool associates with a wise man, he no more comprehends the Truth than a spoon tastes the flavor of the soup.
#65
muhuttamapi ce viññū, paṇḍitaṃ payirupāsati.
khippaṃ dhammaṃ vijānāti, jivhā sūparasaṃ yathā.

Though only for a moment a discerning person associates with a wise man, quickly he comprehends the Truth, just as the tongue tastes the flavor of the soup.
#66
caranti bālā dummedhā, amitteneva attanā.
karontā pāpakaṃ kammaṃ, yaṃ hoti kaṭukapphalaṃ.

Fools of little wit are enemies unto themselves as they move about doing evil deeds, the fruits of which are bitter.
#67
na taṃ kammaṃ kataṃ sādhu, yaṃ katvā anutappati.
yassa assumukho rodaṃ, vipākaṃ paṭisevati.

Ill done is that action of doing which one repents later, and the fruit of which one, weeping, reaps with tears.
#68
tañca kammaṃ kataṃ sādhu, yaṃ katvā nānutappati.
yassa patīto sumano, vipākaṃ paṭisevati.

Well done is that action of doing which one repents not later, and the fruit of which one, reaps with delight and happiness.
#69
madhuvā maññati bālo, yāva pāpaṃ na paccati.
yadā ca paccati pāpaṃ, bālo dukkhaṃ nigacchati.

So long as an evil deed has not ripened, the fool thinks it as sweet as honey. But when the evil deed ripens, the fool comes to grief.
#70
māse māse kusaggena, bālo bhuñjeyya bhojanaṃ.
na so saṅkhātadhammānaṃ, kalaṃ agghati soḷasiṃ.

Month after month a fool may eat his food with the tip of a blade of grass, but he still is not worth a sixteenth part of the those who have comprehended the Truth.
#71
na hi pāpaṃ kataṃ kammaṃ, sajju khīraṃva muccati.
ḍahantaṃ bālamanveti, bhasmacchannova pāvako.

Truly, an evil deed committed does not immediately bear fruit, like milk that does not turn sour all at once. But smoldering, it follows the fool like fire covered by ashes.
#72
yāvadeva anatthāya, ñattaṃ bālassa jāyati.
hanti bālassa sukkaṃsaṃ, muddhamassa vipātayaṃ.

To his own ruin the fool gains knowledge, for it cleaves his head and destroys his innate goodness.
#73-74
asantaṃ bhāvanamiccheyya, purekkhārañca bhikkhusu.
āvāsesu ca issariyaṃ, pūjā parakulesu ca.

mameva kata maññantu, gihīpabbajitā ubho.
mamevātivasā assu, kiccākiccesu kismici.
iti bālassa saṅkappo, icchā māno ca vaḍḍhati.

The fool seeks undeserved reputation, precedence among monks, authority over monasteries, and honor among householders.
Let both laymen and monks think that it was done by me. In every work, great and small, let them follow me' - such is the ambition of the fool; thus his desire and pride increase.
#75
aññā hi lābhūpanisā, aññā nibbānagāminī.
evametaṃ abhiññāya, bhikkhu buddhassa sāvako.
sakkāraṃ nābhinandeyya, vivekamanubrūhaye.

One is the quest for worldly gain, and quite another is the path to Nibbana. Clearly understanding this, let not the monk, the disciple of the Buddha, be carried away by worldly acclaim, but develop detachment instead.
*Panditavagga: The Wise
#76
nidhīnaṃva pavattāraṃ, yaṃ passe vajjadassinaṃ.
niggayhavādiṃ medhāviṃ, tādisaṃ paṇḍitaṃ bhaje.
tādisaṃ bhajamānassa, seyyo hoti na pāpiyo.

Should one find a man who points out faults and who reproves, let him follow such a wise and sagacious person as one would a guide to hidden treasure. It is always better, and never worse, to cultivate such an association.
#77
ovadeyyānusāseyya, asabbhā ca nivāraye.
satañhi so piyo hoti, asataṃ hoti appiyo.

Let him admonish, instruct and shield one from wrong; he, indeed, is dear to the good and detestable to the evil.
#78
na bhaje pāpake mitte, na bhaje purisādhame.
bhajetha mitte kalyāṇe, bhajetha purisuttame.

Do not associate with evil companions; do not seek the fellowship of the vile. Associate with the good friends; seek the fellowship of noble men.
#79
dhammapīti sukhaṃ seti, vippasannena cetasā.
ariyappavedite dhamme, sadā ramati paṇḍito.

He who drinks deep the Dhamma lives happily with a tranquil mind. The wise man ever delights in the Dhamma made known by the Noble One (the Buddha).
#80
udakañhi nayanti nettikā, usukārā namayanti tejanaṃ.
dāruṃ namayanti tacchakā, attānaṃ damayanti paṇḍitā.

Irrigators regulate the rivers; fletchers straighten the arrow shaft; carpenters shape the wood; the wise control themselves.
#81
selo yathā ekaghano, vātena na samīrati.
evaṃ nindāpasaṃsāsu, na samiñjanti paṇḍitā.

Just as a solid rock is not shaken by the storm, even so the wise are not affected by praise or blame.
#82
yathāpi rahado gambhīro, vippasanno anāvilo.
evaṃ dhammāni sutvāna, vippasīdanti paṇḍitā.

On hearing the Teachings, the wise become perfectly purified, like a lake deep, clear and still.
#83
sabbattha ve sappurisā cajanti, na kāmakāmā lapayanti santo.
sukhena phuṭṭhā atha vā dukhena, na uccāvacaṃ paṇḍitā dassayanti.

The good renounce (attachment for) everything. The virtuous do not prattle with a yearning for pleasures. The wise show no elation or depression when touched by happiness or sorrow.
#84
na attahetu na parassa hetu, na puttamicche na dhanaṃ na raṭṭhaṃ.
na iccheyya adhammena samiddhimattano, sa sīlavā paññavā dhammiko siyā.

He is indeed virtuous, wise, and righteous who neither for his own sake nor for the sake of another (does any wrong), who does not crave for sons, wealth, or kingdom, and does not desire success by unjust means.
#85-86
appakā te manussesu, ye janā pāragāmino.
athāyaṃ itarā pajā, tīramevānudhāvati.

ye ca kho sammadakkhāte, dhamme dhammānuvattino.
te janā pāramessanti, maccudheyyaṃ suduttaraṃ.

Few among men are those who cross to the farther shore. The rest, the bulk of men, only run up and down the hither bank.
But those who act according to the perfectly taught Dhamma will cross the realm of Death, so difficult to cross.
#87-88
kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ vippahāya, sukkaṃ bhāvetha paṇḍito.
okā anokamāgamma, viveke yattha dūramaṃ.

tatrābhiratimiccheyya, hitvā kāme akiñcano.
pariyodapeyya attānaṃ, cittaklesehi paṇḍito.

Abandoning the dark way, let the wise man cultivate the bright path. Having gone from home to homelessness, let him yearn for that delight in detachment, so difficult to enjoy.
Giving up sensual pleasures, with no attachment, let the wise man cleanse himself of defilements of the mind.
#89
yesaṃ sambodhiyaṅgesu, sammā cittaṃ subhāvitaṃ.
ādānapaṭinissagge, anupādāya ye ratā.
khīṇāsavā jutimanto, te loke parinibbutā.

Those whose minds have reached full excellence in the factors of enlightenment, who, having renounced acquisitiveness, rejoice in not clinging to things - rid of cankers, glowing with wisdom, they have attained Nibbana in this very life.
*Arahantavagga: Arahants
#90
gataddhino visokassa, vippamuttassa sabbadhi.
sabbaganthappahīnassa, pariḷāho na vijjati.

The fever of passion exists not for him who has completed the journey, who is sorrowless and wholly set free, and has broken all ties.
#91
uyyuñjanti satīmanto, na nikete ramanti te.
haṃsāva pallalaṃ hitvā, okamokaṃ jahanti te.

The mindful ones exert themselves. They are not attached to any home; like swans that abandon the lake, they leave home after home behind.
#92
yesaṃ sannicayo natthi, ye pariññātabhojanā.
suññato animitto ca, vimokkho yesaṃ gocaro.
ākāse va sakuntānaṃ, gati tesaṃ durannayā.

Those who do not accumulate and are wise regarding food, whose object is the Void, the Unconditioned Freedom - their track cannot be traced, like that of birds in the air.
#93
yassāsavā parikkhīṇā, āhāre ca anissito.
suññato animitto ca, vimokkho yassa gocaro.
ākāse va sakuntānaṃ, padaṃ tassa durannayaṃ.

He whose cankers are destroyed and who is not attached to food, whose object is the Void, the Unconditioned Freedom - his path cannot be traced, like that of birds in the air.
#94
yassindriyāni samathaṅgatāni, assā yathā sārathinā sudantā.
pahīnamānassa anāsavassa, devāpi tassa pihayanti tādino.

Even the gods hold dear the wise one, whose senses are subdued like horses well trained by a charioteer, whose pride is destroyed and who is free from the cankers.
#95
pathavisamo no virujjhati, indakhilupamo tādi subbato.
rahadova apetakaddamo, saṃsārā na bhavanti tādino.

There is no more worldly existence for the wise one who, like the earth, resents nothing, who is firm as a high pillar and as pure as a deep pool free from mud.
#96
santaṃ tassa manaṃ hoti, santā vācā ca kamma ca.
sammadaññā vimuttassa, upasantassa tādino.

Calm is his thought, calm his speech, and calm his deed, who, truly knowing, is wholly freed, perfectly tranquil and wise.
#97
assaddho akataññū ca, sandhicchedo ca yo naro.
hatāvakāso vantāso, sa ve uttamaporiso.

The man who is without blind faith, who knows the Uncreated, who has severed all links, destroyed all causes (for karma, good and evil), and thrown out all desires - he, truly, is the most excellent of men.
#98
gāme vā yadi vāraññe, ninne vā yadi vā thale.
yattha arahanto viharanti, taṃ bhūmirāmaṇeyyakaṃ.

Inspiring, indeed, is that place where Arahants dwell, be it a village, a forest, a vale, or a hill.
#99
ramaṇīyāni araññāni, yattha na ramatī jano.
vītarāgā ramissanti, na te kāmagavesino.

Inspiring are the forests in which worldlings find no pleasure. There the passionless will rejoice, for they seek no sensual pleasures.
*Sahassavagga: Thousands
#100
sahassamapi ce vācā, anatthapadasaṃhitā.
ekaṃ atthapadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

Better than a thousand useless words is one useful word, hearing which one attains peace.
#101
sahassamapi ce gāthā, anatthapadasaṃhitā.
ekaṃ gāthāpadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

Better than a thousand useless verses is one useful verse, hearing which one attains peace.
#102
yo ca gāthā sataṃ bhāse, anatthapadasaṃhitā.
ekaṃ dhammapadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

Better than reciting a hundred meaningless verses is the reciting of one verse of Dhamma, hearing which one attains peace.
#103
yo sahassaṃ sahassena, saṅgāme mānuse jine.
ekañca jeyyamattānaṃ, sa ve saṅgāmajuttamo.

Though one may conquer a thousand times a thousand men in battle, yet he indeed is the noblest victor who conquers himself.
#104-105
attā have jitaṃ seyyo, yā cāyaṃ itarā pajā.
attadantassa posassa, niccaṃ saññatacārino.

neva devo na gandhabbo, na māro saha brahmunā.
jitaṃ apajitaṃ kayirā, tathārūpassa jantuno.

Self-conquest is far better then the conquest of others. Not even a god, an angel, Mara or Brahma can turn into defeat the victory of a person who is self-subdued and ever restrained in conduct.
#106
māse māse sahassena, yo yajetha sataṃ samaṃ.
ekañca bhāvitattānaṃ, muhuttamapi pūjaye.
sāyeva pūjanā seyyo, yañce vassasataṃ hutaṃ.

Though month after month for a hundred years one should offer sacrifices by the thousands, yet if only for a moment one should worship those of perfected minds that honor is indeed better than a century of sacrifice.
#107
yo ca vassasataṃ jantu, aggiṃ paricare vane.
ekañca bhāvitattānaṃ, muhuttamapi pūjaye.
sāyeva pūjanā seyyo, yañce vassasataṃ hutaṃ.

Though for a hundred years one should tend the sacrificial fire in the forest, yet if only for a moment one should worship those of perfected minds, that worship is indeed better than a century of sacrifice.
#108
yaṃ kiñci yiṭṭhaṃ va hutaṃ va loke, saṃvaccharaṃ yajetha puññapekkho.
sabbampi taṃ na catubhāgameti, abhivādanā ujjugatesu seyyo.

Whatever gifts and oblations one seeking merit might offer in this world for a whole year, all that is not worth one fourth of the merit gained by revering the Upright Ones, which is truly excellent.
#109
abhivādanasīlissa, niccaṃ vuḍḍhāpacāyino.
cattāro dhammā vaḍḍhanti, āyu vaṇṇo sukhaṃ balaṃ.

To one ever eager to revere and serve the elders, these four blessing accrue: long life and beauty, happiness and power.
#110
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, dussīlo asamāhito.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, sīlavantassa jhāyino.

Better it is to live one day virtuous and meditative than to live a hundred years immoral and uncontrolled.
#111
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, duppañño asamāhito.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, paññavantassa jhāyino.

Better it is to live one day wise and meditative than to live a hundred years foolish and uncontrolled.
#112
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, kusīto hīnavīriyo.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, vīriyamārabhato daḷhaṃ.

Better it is to live one day strenuous and resolute than to live a hundred years sluggish and dissipated.
#113
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ udayabbayaṃ.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato udayabbayaṃ.

Better it is to live one day seeing the rise and fall of things than to live as hundred years without ever seeing the rise and fall of things.
#114
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ amataṃ padaṃ.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato amataṃ padaṃ.

Better it is to live one day seeing the Deathless than to live a hundred years without ever seeing the Deathless.
#115
yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ dhammamuttamaṃ.
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato dhammamuttamaṃ.

Better it is to live one day seeing the Supreme Truth than to live a hundred years without ever seeing the Supreme Truth.
*Papavagga: Evil
#116
abhittharetha kalyāṇe, pāpā cittaṃ nivāraye.
dandhañhi karoto puññaṃ, pāpasmiṃ ramatī mano.

Hasten to do good; restrain your mind from evil. He who is slow in doing good, his mind delights in evil.
#117
pāpañce puriso kayirā, na naṃ kayirā punappunaṃ.
na tamhi chandaṃ kayirātha, dukkho pāpassa uccayo.

Should a person commit evil, let him not do it again and again. Let him not find pleasure therein, for painful is the accumulation of evil.
#118
puññañce puriso kayirā, kayirā naṃ punappunaṃ.
tamhi chandaṃ kayirātha, sukho puññassa uccayo.

Should a person do good, let him do it again and again. Let him find pleasure therein, for blissful is the accumulation of good.
#119
pāpopi passati bhadraṃ, yāva pāpaṃ na paccati.
yadā ca paccati pāpaṃ, atha pāpo pāpāni passati.

It may be well with the evil-doer as long as the evil ripens not. But when it does ripen, then the evil-doer sees (the painful results of) his evil deeds.
#120
bhadropi passati pāpaṃ, yāva bhadraṃ na paccati.
yadā ca paccati bhadraṃ, atha bhadro bhadrāni passati.

It may be ill with the doer of good as long as the good ripens not. But when it does ripen, then the doer of good sees (the pleasant results of) his good deeds.
#121
māvamaññetha pāpassa, na mantaṃ āgamissati.
udabindunipātena, udakumbhopi pūrati.
bālo pūrati pāpassa, thokaṃ thokampi ācinaṃ.

Think not lightly of evil, saying, 'It will not come to me.' Drop by drop is the water pot filled. Likewise, the fool, gathering it little by little, fills himself with evil.
#122
māvamaññetha puññassa, na mantaṃ āgamissati.
udabindunipātena, udakumbhopi pūrati.
dhīro pūrati puññassa, thokaṃ thokampi ācinaṃ.

Think not lightly of good, saying, 'It will not come to me.' Drop by drop is the water pot filled. Likewise, the wise man, gathering it little by little, fills himself with good.
#123
vāṇijova bhayaṃ maggaṃ, appasattho mahaddhano.
visaṃ jīvitukāmova, pāpāni parivajjaye.

Just as a trader with a small escort and great wealth would avoid a perilous route, or just as one desiring to live avoids poison, even so should one shun evil.
#124
pāṇimhi ce vaṇo nāssa, hareyya pāṇinā visaṃ.
nābbaṇaṃ visamanveti, natthi pāpaṃ akubbato.

If on the hand there is no wound, one may carry even poison in it. Poison does not affect one who is free from wounds. For him who does no evil, there is no ill.
#125
yo appaduṭṭhassa narassa dussati, suddhassa posassa anaṅgaṇassa.
tameva bālaṃ pacceti pāpaṃ, sukhumo rajo paṭivātaṃva khitto.

Like fine dust thrown against the wind, evil falls back upon that fool who offends an inoffensive, pure and guiltless man.
#126
gabbhameke uppajjanti, nirayaṃ pāpakammino.
saggaṃ sugatino yanti, parinibbanti anāsavā.

Some are born in the womb; the wicked are born in hell; the devout go to heaven; the stainless pass into Nibbana.
#127
na antalikkhe na samuddamajjhe, na pabbatānaṃ vivaraṃ pavissa.
na vijjatī so jagatippadeso, yatthaṭṭhito mucceyya pāpakammā.

Neither in the sky nor in mid-ocean, nor by entering into mountain clefts, nowhere in the world is there a place where one may escape from the results of evil deeds.
#128
na antalikkhe na samuddamajjhe, na pabbatānaṃ vivaraṃ pavissa.
na vijjatī so jagatippadeso, yatthaṭṭhitaṃ nappasaheyya maccu.

Neither in the sky nor in mid-ocean, nor by entering into mountain clefts, nowhere in the world is there a place where one will not be overcome by death.
*Dandavagga: The Rod
#129
sabbe tasanti daṇḍassa, sabbe bhāyanti maccuno.
attānaṃ upamaṃ katvā, na haneyya na ghātaye.

All tremble at violence; all fear death. Putting oneself in the place of another, one should not kill nor cause another to kill.
#130
sabbe tasanti daṇḍassa, sabbesaṃ jīvitaṃ piyaṃ.
attānaṃ upamaṃ katvā, na haneyya na ghātaye.

All tremble at violence; life is dear to all. Putting oneself in the place of another, one should not kill nor cause another to kill.
#131
sukhakāmāni bhūtāni, yo daṇḍena vihiṃsati.
attano sukhamesāno, pecca so na labhate sukhaṃ.

One who, while himself seeking happiness, oppresses with violence other beings who also desire happiness, will not attain happiness hereafter.
#132
sukhakāmāni bhūtāni, yo daṇḍena na hiṃsati.
attano sukhamesāno, pecca so labhate sukhaṃ.

One who, while himself seeking happiness, does not oppress with violence other beings who also desire happiness, will find happiness hereafter.
#133
māvoca pharusaṃ kañci, vuttā paṭivadeyyu taṃ.
dukkhā hi sārambhakathā, paṭidaṇḍā phuseyyu taṃ.

Speak not harshly to anyone, for those thus spoken to might retort. Indeed, angry speech hurts, and retaliation may overtake you.
#134
sace neresi attānaṃ, kaṃso upahato yathā.
esa pattosi nibbānaṃ, sārambho te na vijjati.

If, like a broken gong, you silence yourself, you have approached Nibbana, for vindictiveness is no longer in you.
#135
yathā daṇḍena gopālo, gāvo pājeti gocaraṃ.
evaṃ jarā ca maccu ca, āyuṃ pājenti pāṇinaṃ.

Just as a cowherd drives the cattle to pasture with a staff, so do old age and death drive the life force of beings (from existence to existence).
#136
atha pāpāni kammāni, karaṃ bālo na bujjhati.
sehi kammehi dummedho, aggidaḍḍhova tappati.

When the fool commits evil deeds, he does not realize (their evil nature). The witless man is tormented by his own deeds, like one burnt by fire.
#137-140
yo daṇḍena adaṇḍesu, appaduṭṭhesu dussati.
dasannamaññataraṃ ṭhānaṃ, khippameva nigacchati.

vedanaṃ pharusaṃ jāniṃ, sarīrassa ca bhedanaṃ.
garukaṃ vāpi ābādhaṃ, cittakkhepañca pāpuṇe.

rājato vā upasaggaṃ, abbhakkhānañca dāruṇaṃ.
parikkhayañca ñātīnaṃ, bhogānañca pabhaṅguraṃ.

atha vāssa agārāni, aggi ḍahati pāvako.
kāyassa bhedā duppañño, nirayaṃ sopapajjati.

He who inflicts violence on those who are unarmed, and offends those who are inoffensive, will soon come upon one of these ten states:
Sharp pain, or disaster, bodily injury, serious illness, or derangement of mind, trouble from the government, or grave charges, loss of relatives, or loss of wealth, or houses destroyed by ravaging fire; upon dissolution of the body that ignorant man is born in hell.
#141
na naggacariyā na jaṭā na paṅkā, nānāsakā thaṇḍilasāyikā vā.
rajojallaṃ ukkuṭikappadhānaṃ, sodhenti maccaṃ avitiṇṇakaṅkhaṃ.

Neither going about naked, nor matted locks, nor filth, nor fasting, nor lying on the ground, nor smearing oneself with ashes and dust, nor sitting on the heels (in penance) can purify a mortal who has not overcome doubt.
#142
alaṅkato cepi samaṃ careyya, santo danto niyato brahmacārī.
sabbesu bhūtesu nidhāya daṇḍaṃ, so brāhmaṇo so samaṇo sa bhikkhu.

Even though he be well-attired, yet if he is posed, calm, controlled and established in the holy life, having set aside violence towards all beings - he, truly, is a holy man, a renunciate, a monk.
#143
hirīnisedho puriso, koci lokasmi vijjati.
yo niddaṃ apabodheti, asso bhadro kasāmiva.

Only rarely is there a man in this world who, restrained by modesty, avoids reproach, as a thoroughbred horse avoids the whip.
#144
asso yathā bhadro kasāniviṭṭho, ātāpino saṃvegino bhavātha.
saddhāya sīlena ca vīriyena ca, samādhinā dhammavinicchayena ca.
sampannavijjācaraṇā patissatā, jahissatha dukkhamidaṃ anappakaṃ.

Like a thoroughbred horse touched by the whip, be strenuous, be filled with spiritual yearning. By faith and moral purity, by effort and meditation, by investigation of the truth, by being rich in knowledge and virtue, and by being mindful, destroy this unlimited suffering.
#145
udakañhi nayanti nettikā, usukārā namayanti tejanaṃ.
dāruṃ namayanti tacchakā, attānaṃ damayanti subbatā.

Irrigators regulate the waters, fletchers straighten arrow shafts, carpenters shape wood, and the good control themselves.
*Jaravagga: Aging
#146
ko nu hāso kimānando, niccaṃ pajjalite sati.
andhakārena onaddhā, padīpaṃ na gavesatha.

When this world is ever ablaze, why this laughter, why this jubilation? Shrouded in darkness, will you not see the light?
#147
passa cittakataṃ bimbaṃ, arukāyaṃ samussitaṃ.
āturaṃ bahusaṅkappaṃ, yassa natthi dhuvaṃ ṭhiti.

Behold this body - a painted image, a mass of heaped up sores, infirm, full of hankering - of which nothing is lasting or stable!
#148
parijiṇṇamidaṃ rūpaṃ, roganīḷaṃ pabhaṅguraṃ.
bhijjati pūtisandeho, maraṇantañhi jīvitaṃ.

Fully worn out is this body, a nest of disease, and fragile. This foul mass breaks up, for death is the end of life.
#149
yānimāni apatthāni, alābūneva sārade.
kāpotakāni aṭṭhīni, tāni disvāna kā rati.

These dove-colored bones are like gourds that lie scattered about in autumn. Having seen them, how can one seek delight?
#150
aṭṭhīnaṃ nagaraṃ kataṃ, maṃsalohitalepanaṃ.
yattha jarā ca maccu ca, māno makkho ca ohito.

This city (body) is built of bones, plastered with flesh and blood; within are decay and death, pride and jealousy.
#151
jīranti ve rājarathā sucittā, atho sarīrampi jaraṃ upeti.
satañca dhammo na jaraṃ upeti, santo have sabbhi pavedayanti.

Even gorgeous royal chariots wear out, and indeed this body too wears out. But the Dhamma of the Good does not age; thus the Good make it known to the good.
#152
appassutāyaṃ puriso, balibaddhova jīrati.
maṃsāni tassa vaḍḍhanti, paññā tassa na vaḍḍhati.

The man of little learning grows old like a bull. He grows only in bulk, but, his wisdom does not grow.
#153-154
anekajātisaṃsāraṃ, sandhāvissaṃ anibbisaṃ.
gahakāraṃ gavesanto, dukkhā jāti punappunaṃ.

gahakāraka diṭṭhosi, puna gehaṃ na kāhasi.
sabbā te phāsukā bhaggā, gahakūṭaṃ visaṅkhataṃ.
visaṅkhāragataṃ cittaṃ, taṇhānaṃ khayamajjhagā.

Through many a birth in samsara have I wandered in vain, seeking in the builder of this house (of life). Repeated birth is indeed suffering!
O house-builder, you are seen! You will not build this house again. For your rafters are broken and your ridgepole shattered. My mind has reached the Unconditioned; I have attained the destruction of craving.
#155
acaritvā brahmacariyaṃ, aladdhā yobbane dhanaṃ.
jiṇṇakoñcāva jhāyanti, khīṇamaccheva pallale.

Those who in youth have not led the holy life, or have failed to acquire wealth, languish like old cranes in the pond without fish.
#156
acaritvā brahmacariyaṃ, aladdhā yobbane dhanaṃ.
senti cāpātikhīṇāva, purāṇāni anutthunaṃ.

Those who in youth have not lead the holy life, or have failed to acquire wealth, lie sighing over the past, like worn out arrows (shot from) a bow.
*Attavagga: Self
#157
attānañce piyaṃ jaññā, rakkheyya naṃ surakkhitaṃ.
tiṇṇaṃ aññataraṃ yāmaṃ, paṭijaggeyya paṇḍito.

If one holds oneself dear, one should diligently watch oneself. Let the wise man keep vigil during any of the three watches of the night.
#158
attānameva paṭhamaṃ, patirūpe nivesaye.
athaññamanusāseyya, na kilisseyya paṇḍito.

One should first establish oneself in what is proper; then only should one instruct others. Thus the wise man will not be reproached.
#159
attānaṃ ce tathā kayirā, yathāññamanusāsati.
sudanto vata dametha, attā hi kira duddamo.

One should do what one teaches others to do; if one would train others, one should be well controlled oneself. Difficult, indeed, is self-control.
#160
attā hi attano nātho, ko hi nātho paro siyā.
attanā hi sudantena, nāthaṃ labhati dullabhaṃ.

One truly is the protector of oneself; who else could the protector be? With oneself fully controlled, one gains a mastery that is hard to gain.
#161
attanā hi kataṃ pāpaṃ, attajaṃ attasambhavaṃ.
abhimatthati dummedhaṃ, vajiraṃ vasmamayaṃ maṇiṃ.

The evil a witless man does by himself, born of himself and produced by himself, grinds him as a diamond grinds a hard gem.
#162
yassa accantadussīlyaṃ, māluvā sālamivotthataṃ.
karoti so tathattānaṃ, yathā naṃ icchatī diso.

Just as a single creeper strangles the tree on which it grows, even so, a man who is exceedingly depraved harms himself as only an enemy might wish.
#163
sukarāni asādhūni, attano ahitāni ca.
yaṃ ve hitañca sādhuñca, taṃ ve paramadukkaraṃ.

Easy to do are things that are bad and harmful to oneself. But exceedingly difficult to do are things that are good and beneficial.
#164
yo sāsanaṃ arahataṃ, ariyānaṃ dhammajīvinaṃ.
paṭikkosati dummedho, diṭṭhiṃ nissāya pāpikaṃ.
phalāni kaṭṭhakasseva, attaghātāya phallati.

Whoever, on account of perverted views, scorns the Teaching of the Perfected Ones, the Noble and Righteous Ones - that fool, like the bamboo, produces fruits only for self destruction.
#165
attanā hi kataṃ pāpaṃ, attanā saṃkilissati.
attanā akataṃ pāpaṃ, attanāva visujjhati.
suddhī asuddhi paccattaṃ, nāñño aññaṃ visodhaye.

By oneself is evil done; by oneself is one defiled. By oneself is evil left undone; by oneself is one made pure. Purity and impurity depended on oneself; no one can purify another.
#166
attadatthaṃ paratthena, bahunāpi na hāpaye.
attadatthamabhiññāya, sadatthapasuto siyā.

Let one not neglect one's own welfare for the sake of another, however great. Clearly understanding one's own welfare, let one be intent upon the good.
*Lokavagga: Worlds
#167
hīnaṃ dhammaṃ na seveyya, pamādena na saṃvase.
micchādiṭṭhiṃ na seveyya, na siyā lokavaḍḍhano.

Follow not the vulgar way; live not in heedlessness; hold not false views; linger not long in worldly existence.
#168
uttiṭṭhe nappamajjeyya, dhammaṃ sucaritaṃ care.
dhammacārī sukhaṃ seti, asmiṃ loke paramhi ca.

Arise! Do not be heedless! Lead a righteous life. The righteous live happily both in this world and the next.
#169
dhammaṃ care sucaritaṃ, na naṃ duccaritaṃ care.
dhammacārī sukhaṃ seti, asmiṃ loke paramhi ca.

Lead a righteous life; lead not a base life. The righteous live happily both in this world and the next.
#170
yathā pubbuḷakaṃ passe, yathā passe marīcikaṃ.
evaṃ lokaṃ avekkhantaṃ, maccurājā na passati.

One who looks upon the world as a bubble and a mirage, him the King of Death sees not.
#171
etha passathimaṃ lokaṃ, cittaṃ rājarathūpamaṃ.
yattha bālā visīdanti, natthi saṅgo vijānataṃ.

Come! Behold this world, which is like a decorated royal chariot. Here fools flounder, but the wise have no attachment to it.
#172
yo ca pubbe pamajjitvā, pacchā so nappamajjati.
somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, abbhā muttova candimā.

He who having been heedless is heedless no more, illuminates this world like the moon freed from clouds.
#173
yassa pāpaṃ kataṃ kammaṃ, kusalena pidhīyati.
somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, abbhā muttova candimā.

He, who by good deeds covers the evil he has done, illuminates this world like the moon freed from clouds.
#174
andhabhūto ayaṃ loko, tanukettha vipassati.
sakuṇo jālamuttova, appo saggāya gacchati.

Blind is the world; here only a few possess insight. Only a few, like birds escaping from the net, go to realms of bliss.
#175
haṃsādiccapathe yanti, ākāse yanti iddhiyā.
nīyanti dhīrā lokamhā, jetvā māraṃ savāhiniṃ.

Swans fly on the path of the sun; men pass through the air by psychic powers; the wise are led away from the world after vanquishing Mara and his host.
#176
ekaṃ dhammaṃ atītassa, musāvādissa jantuno.
vitiṇṇaparalokassa, natthi pāpaṃ akāriyaṃ.

For a liar who has violated the one law (of truthfulness) who holds in scorn the hereafter, there is no evil that he cannot do.
#177
na ve kadariyā devalokaṃ vajanti, bālā have nappasaṃsanti dānaṃ.
dhīro ca dānaṃ anumodamāno, teneva so hoti sukhī parattha.

Truly, misers fare not to heavenly realms; nor, indeed, do fools praise generosity. But the wise man rejoices in giving, and by that alone does he become happy hereafter.
#178
pathabyā ekarajjena, saggassa gamanena vā.
sabbalokādhipaccena, sotāpattiphalaṃ varaṃ.

Better than sole sovereignty over the earth, better than going to heaven, better even than lordship over all the worlds is the supramundane Fruition of Stream Entrance.
*Buddhavagga: Awakened
#179
yassa jitaṃ nāvajīyati, jitaṃ yassa no yāti koci loke.
taṃ buddhamanantagocaraṃ, apadaṃ kena padena nessatha.

By what track can you trace that trackless Buddha of limitless range, whose victory nothing can undo, whom none of the vanquished defilements can ever pursue?
#180
yassa jālinī visattikā, taṇhā natthi kuhiñci netave.
taṃ buddhamanantagocaraṃ, apadaṃ kena padena nessatha.

By what track can you trace that trackless Buddha of limitless range, in whom exists no longer, the entangling and embroiling craving that perpetuates becoming?
#181
ye jhānapasutā dhīrā, nekkhammūpasame ratā.
devāpi tesaṃ pihayanti, sambuddhānaṃ satīmataṃ.

Those wise ones who are devoted to meditation and who delight in the calm of renunciation - such mindful ones, Supreme Buddhas, even the gods hold dear.
#182
kiccho manussapaṭilābho, kicchaṃ maccāna jīvitaṃ.
kicchaṃ saddhammassavanaṃ, kiccho buddhānamuppādo.

Hard is it to be born a man; hard is the life of mortals. Hard is it to gain the opportunity of hearing the Sublime Truth, and hard to encounter is the arising of the Buddhas.
#183
sabbapāpassa akaraṇaṃ, kusalassa upasampadā.
sacittapariyodapanaṃ, etaṃ buddhāna sāsanaṃ.

To avoid all evil, to cultivate good, and to cleanse one's mind - this is the teaching of the Buddhas.
#184
khantī paramaṃ tapo titikkhā, nibbānaṃ paramaṃ vadanti buddhā.
na hi pabbajito parūpaghātī, na samaṇo hoti paraṃ viheṭhayanto.

Enduring patience is the highest austerity. 'Nibbana is supreme,' say the Buddhas. He is not a true monk who harms another, nor a true renunciate who oppresses others.
#185
anūpavādo anūpaghāto, pātimokkhe ca saṃvaro.
mattaññutā ca bhattasmiṃ, pantañca sayanāsanaṃ.
adhicitte ca āyogo, etaṃ buddhāna sāsanaṃ.

Not despising, not harming, restraint according to the code of monastic discipline, moderation in food, dwelling in solitude, devotion to meditation - this is the teaching of the Buddhas.
#186-187
na kahāpaṇavassena, titti kāmesu vijjati.
appassādā dukhā kāmā, iti viññāya paṇḍito.

api dibbesu kāmesu, ratiṃ so nādhigacchati.
taṇhakkhayarato hoti, sammāsambuddhasāvako.

There is no satisfying sensual desires, even with the rain of gold coins. For sensual pleasures give little satisfaction and much pain. Having understood this, the wise man finds no delight even in heavenly pleasures. The disciple of the Supreme Buddha delights in the destruction of craving.
#188-192
bahuṃ ve saraṇaṃ yanti, pabbatāni vanāni ca.
ārāmarukkhacetyāni, manussā bhayatajjitā.

netaṃ kho saraṇaṃ khemaṃ, netaṃ saraṇamuttamaṃ.
netaṃ saraṇamāgamma, sabbadukkhā pamuccati.

yo ca buddhañca dhammañca, saṅghañca saraṇaṃ gato.
cattāri ariyasaccāni, sammappaññāya passati.

dukkhaṃ dukkhasamuppādaṃ, dukkhassa ca atikkamaṃ.
ariyaṃ caṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ, dukkhūpasamagāminaṃ.

etaṃ kho saraṇaṃ khemaṃ, etaṃ saraṇamuttamaṃ.
etaṃ saraṇamāgamma, sabbadukkhā pamuccati.

Driven only by fear, do men go for refuge to many places - to hills, woods, groves, trees and shrines.
Such, indeed, is no safe refuge; such is not the refuge supreme. Not by resorting to such a refuge is one released from all suffering.
He who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Teaching and his Order, penetrates with transcendental wisdom the Four Noble Truths - suffering, the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the Noble Eightfold Path leading to the cessation of suffering.
This indeed is the safe refuge, this the refuge supreme. Having gone to such a refuge, one is released from all suffering.
#193
dullabho purisājañño, na so sabbattha jāyati.
yattha so jāyati dhīro, taṃ kulaṃ sukhamedhati.

Hard to find is the thoroughbred man (the Buddha); he is not born everywhere. Where such a wise man is born, that clan thrives happily.
#194
sukho buddhānamuppādo, sukhā saddhammadesanā.
sukhā saṅghassa sāmaggī, samaggānaṃ tapo sukho.

Blessed is the birth of the Buddhas; blessed is the enunciation of the sacred Teaching; blessed is the harmony in the Order, and blessed is the spiritual pursuit of the united truth-seeker.
#195-196
pūjārahe pūjayato, buddhe yadi va sāvake.
papañcasamatikkante, tiṇṇasokapariddave.

te tādise pūjayato, nibbute akutobhaye.
na sakkā puññaṃ saṅkhātuṃ, imettamapi kenaci.

He who reveres those worthy of reverence, the Buddhas and their disciples, who have transcended all obstacles and passed beyond the reach of sorrow and lamentation - he who reveres such peaceful and fearless ones, his merit none can compute by any measure.
*Sukhavagga: Happy
#197
susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, verinesu averino.
verinesu manussesu, viharāma averino.

Happy indeed we live, friendly amidst the hostile. Amidst hostile men we dwell free from hatred.
#198
susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, āturesu anāturā.
āturesu manussesu, viharāma anāturā.

Happy indeed we live, friendly amidst the afflicted (by craving). Amidst afflicted men we dwell free from affliction.
#199
susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, ussukesu anussukā.
ussukesu manassesu, viharāma anussukā.

Happy indeed we live, free from avarice amidst the avaricious. Amidst the avaricious men we dwell free from avarice.
#200
susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, yesaṃ no natthi kiñcanaṃ.
pītibhakkhā bhavissāma, devā ābhassarā yathā.

Happy indeed we live, we who possess nothing. Feeders on joy we shall be, like the Radiant Gods.
#201
jayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, dukkhaṃ seti parājito.
upasanto sukhaṃ seti, hitvā jayaparājayaṃ.

Victory begets enmity; the defeated dwell in pain. Happily the peaceful live, discarding both victory and defeat.
#202
natthi rāgasamo aggi, natthi dosasamo kali.
natthi khandhasamā dukkhā, natthi santiparaṃ sukhaṃ.

There is no fire like lust and no crime like hatred. There is no ill like the aggregates (of existence) and no bliss higher than the peace (of Nibbana).
#203
jighacchāparamā rogā, saṅkhāraparamā dukhā.
etaṃ ñatvā yathābhūtaṃ, nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ.

Hunger is the worst disease, conditioned things the worst suffering. Knowing this as it really is, the wise realize Nibbana, the highest bliss.
#204
ārogyaparamā lābhā, santuṭṭhiparamaṃ dhanaṃ.
vissāsaparamā ñāti, nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ.

Health is the most precious gain and contentment the greatest wealth. A trustworthy person is the best kinsman, Nibbana the highest bliss.
#205
pavivekarasaṃ pitvā, rasaṃ upasamassa ca.
niddaro hoti nippāpo, dhammapītirasaṃ pivaṃ.

Having savored the taste of solitude and peace (of Nibbana), pain-free and stainless he becomes, drinking deep the taste of the bliss of the Truth.
#206
sāhu dassanamariyānaṃ, sannivāso sadā sukho.
adassanena bālānaṃ, niccameva sukhī siyā.

Good is it to see the Noble Ones; to live with them is ever blissful. One will always be happy by not encountering fools.
#207
bālasaṅgatacārī hi, dīghamaddhāna socati.
dukkho bālehi saṃvāso, amitteneva sabbadā.
dhīro ca sukhasaṃvāso, ñātīnaṃva samāgamo.

Indeed, he who moves in the company of fools grieves for longing. Association with fools is ever painful, like partnership with an enemy. But association with the wise is happy, like meeting one's own kinsmen.
#208
tasmā hi --
dhīrañca paññañca bahussutañca, dhorayhasīlaṃ vatavantamariyaṃ.
taṃ tādisaṃ sappurisaṃ sumedhaṃ, bhajetha nakkhattapathaṃva candimā.

Therefore, follow the Noble One, who is steadfast, wise, learned, dutiful and devout. One should follow only such a man, who is truly good and discerning, even as the moon follows the path of the stars.
*Piyavagga: Dear Ones
#209
ayoge yuñjamattānaṃ, yogasmiñca ayojayaṃ.
atthaṃ hitvā piyaggāhī, pihetattānuyoginaṃ.

Giving himself to things to be shunned and not exerting where exertion is needed, a seeker after pleasures, having given up his true welfare, envies those intent upon theirs.
#210
mā piyehi samāgañchi, appiyehi kudācanaṃ.
piyānaṃ adassanaṃ dukkhaṃ, appiyānañca dassanaṃ.

Seek no intimacy with the beloved and also not with the unloved, for not to see the beloved and to see the unloved, both are painful.
#211
tasmā piyaṃ na kayirātha, piyāpāyo hi pāpako.
ganthā tesaṃ na vijjanti, yesaṃ natthi piyāppiyaṃ.

Therefore hold nothing dear, for separation from the dear is painful. There are no bonds for those who have nothing beloved or unloved.
#212
piyato jāyatī soko, piyato jāyatī bhayaṃ.
piyato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ.

From endearment springs grief, from endearment springs fear. From him who is wholly free from endearment there is no grief, whence then fear?
#213
pemato jāyatī soko, pemato jāyatī bhayaṃ.
pemato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ.

From affection springs grief, from affection springs fear. From him who is wholly free from affection there is no grief, whence then fear?
#214
ratiyā jāyatī soko, ratiyā jāyatī bhayaṃ.
ratiyā vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ.

From attachment springs grief, from attachment springs fear. From him who is wholly free from attachment there is no grief, whence then fear?
#215
kāmato jāyatī soko, kāmato jāyatī bhayaṃ.
kāmato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ.

From lust springs grief, from lust springs fear. From him who is wholly free from craving there is no grief; whence then fear?
#216
taṇhāya jāyatī soko, taṇhāya jāyatī bhayaṃ.
taṇhāya vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ.

From craving springs grief, from craving springs fear. From him who is wholly free from craving there is no grief; whence then fear?
#217
sīladassanasampannaṃ, dhammaṭṭhaṃ saccavedinaṃ.
attano kamma kubbānaṃ, taṃ jano kurute piyaṃ.

People hold dear him who embodies virtue and insight, who is principled, has realized the truth, and who himself does what he ought to be doing.
#218
chandajāto anakkhāte, manasā ca phuṭo siyā.
kāmesu ca appaṭibaddhacitto, uddhaṃsototi vuccati.

One who is intent upon the Ineffable (Nibbana), dwells with mind inspired (by supramundane wisdom), and is no more bound by sense pleasures - such a man is called 'One Bound Upstream.'
#219-220
cirappavāsiṃ purisaṃ, dūrato sotthimāgataṃ.
ñātimittā suhajjā ca, abhinandanti āgataṃ.

tatheva katapuññampi, asmā lokā paraṃ gataṃ.
puññāni paṭigaṇhanti, piyaṃ ñātīva āgataṃ.

When, after a long absence, a man safely returns from afar, his relatives, friends and well-wishers welcome him home on arrival.
As kinsmen welcome a dear one on arrival, even so his own good deeds will welcome the doer of good who has gone from this world to the next.
*Kodhavagga: Anger
#221
kodhaṃ jahe vippajaheyya mānaṃ, saṃyojanaṃ sabbamatikkameyya.
taṃ nāmarūpasmimasajjamānaṃ, akiñcanaṃ nānupatanti dukkhā.

One should give up anger, renounce pride, and overcome all fetters. Suffering never befalls him who clings not to mind and body and is detached.
#222
yo ve uppatitaṃ kodhaṃ, rathaṃ bhantaṃva vāraye.
tamahaṃ sārathiṃ brūmi, rasmiggāho itaro jano.

He who checks rising anger as a charioteer checks a rolling chariot, him I call a true charioteer. Others only hold the reins.
#223
akkodhena jine kodhaṃ, asādhuṃ sādhunā jine.
jine kadariyaṃ dānena, saccenālikavādinaṃ.

Overcome the angry by non-anger; overcome the wicked by goodness; overcome the miser by generosity; overcome the liar by truth.
#224
saccaṃ bhaṇe na kujjheyya, dajjā appampi yācito.
etehi tīhi ṭhānehi, gacche devāna santike.

Speak the truth; yield not to anger; when asked, give even if you only have a little. By these three means can one reach the presence of the gods.
#225
ahiṃsakā ye munayo, niccaṃ kāyena saṃvutā.
te yanti accutaṃ ṭhānaṃ, yattha gantvā na socare.

Those sages who are inoffensive and ever restrained in body, go to the Deathless State, where, having gone, they grieve no more.
#226
sadā jāgaramānānaṃ, ahorattānusikkhinaṃ.
nibbānaṃ adhimuttānaṃ, atthaṃ gacchanti āsavā.

Those who are ever vigilant, who discipline themselves day and night, and are ever intent upon Nibbana - their defilements fade away.
#227
porāṇametaṃ atula, netaṃ ajjatanāmiva.
nindanti tuṇhimāsīnaṃ, nindanti bahubhāṇinaṃ.
mitabhāṇimpi nindanti, natthi loke anindito.

O Atula! Indeed, this is an ancient practice, not one only of today: they blame those who remain silent, they blame those who speak much, they blame those who speak in moderation. There is none in the world who is not blamed.
#228
na cāhu na ca bhavissati, na cetarahi vijjati.
ekantaṃ nindito poso, ekantaṃ vā pasaṃsito.

There never was, there never will be, nor is there now, a person who is wholly blamed or wholly praised.
#229-230
yaṃ ce viññū pasaṃsanti, anuvicca suve suve.
acchiddavuttiṃ medhāviṃ, paññāsīlasamāhitaṃ.

nikkhaṃ jambonadasseva, ko taṃ ninditumarahati.
devāpi naṃ pasaṃsanti, brahmunāpi pasaṃsito.

But the man whom the wise praise, after observing him day after day, is one of flawless character, wise, and endowed with knowledge and virtue.
Who can blame such a one, as worthy as a coin of refined gold? Even the gods praise him; by Brahma, too, is he praised.
#231
kāyappakopaṃ rakkheyya, kāyena saṃvuto siyā.
kāyaduccaritaṃ hitvā, kāyena sucaritaṃ care.

Let a man guard himself against irritability in bodily action; let him be controlled in deed. Abandoning bodily misconduct, let him practice good conduct in deed.
#232
vacīpakopaṃ rakkheyya, vācāya saṃvuto siyā.
vacīduccaritaṃ hitvā, vācāya sucaritaṃ care.

Let a man guard himself against irritability in speech; let him be controlled in speech. Abandoning verbal misconduct, let him practice good conduct in speech.
#233
manopakopaṃ rakkheyya, manasā saṃvuto siyā.
manoduccaritaṃ hitvā, manasā sucaritaṃ care.

Let a man guard himself against irritability in thought; let him be controlled in mind. Abandoning mental misconduct, let him practice good conduct in thought.
#234
kāyena saṃvutā dhīrā, atho vācāya saṃvutā.
manasā saṃvutā dhīrā, te ve suparisaṃvutā.

The wise are controlled in bodily action, controlled in speech and controlled in thought. They are truly well-controlled.
*Malavagga: Impurities
#235
paṇḍupalāsova dānisi, yamapurisāpi ca te upaṭṭhitā.
uyyogamukhe ca tiṭṭhasi, pātheyyampi ca te na vijjati.

Like a withered leaf are you now; death's messengers await you. You stand on the eve of your departure, yet you have made no provision for your journey!
#236
so karohi dīpamattano, khippaṃ vāyama paṇḍito bhava.
niddhantamalo anaṅgaṇo, dibbaṃ ariyabhūmiṃ upehisi.

Make an island for yourself! Strive hard and become wise! Rid of impurities and cleansed of stain, you shall enter the celestial abode of the Noble Ones.
#237
upanītavayo ca dānisi, sampayātosi yamassa santike.
vāso te natthi antarā, pātheyyampi ca te na vijjati.

Your life has come to an end now; You are setting forth into the presence of Yama, the king of death. No resting place is there for you on the way, yet you have made no provision for the journey!
#238
so karohi dīpamattano, khippaṃ vāyama paṇḍito bhava.
niddhantamalo anaṅgaṇo, na punaṃ jātijaraṃ upehisi.

Make an island unto yourself! Strive hard and become wise! Rid of impurities and cleansed of stain, you shall not come again to birth and decay.
#239
anupubbena medhāvī, thokaṃ thokaṃ khaṇe khaṇe.
kammāro rajatasseva, niddhame malamattano.

One by one, little by little, moment by moment, a wise man should remove his own impurities, as a smith removes his dross from silver.
#240
ayasāva malaṃ samuṭṭhitaṃ, tatuṭṭhāya tameva khādati.
evaṃ atidhonacārinaṃ, sāni kammāni nayanti duggatiṃ.

Just as rust arising from iron eats away the base from which it arises, even so, their own deeds lead transgressors to states of woe.
#241
asajjhāyamalā mantā, anuṭṭhānamalā gharā.
malaṃ vaṇṇassa kosajjaṃ, pamādo rakkhato malaṃ.

Non-repetition is the bane of scriptures; neglect is the bane of a home; slovenliness is the bane of personal appearance, and heedlessness is the bane of a guard.
#242
malitthiyā duccaritaṃ, maccheraṃ dadato malaṃ.
malā ve pāpakā dhammā, asmiṃ loke paramhi ca.

Unchastity is the taint in a woman; niggardliness is the taint in a giver. Taints, indeed, are all evil things, both in this world and the next.
#243
tato malā malataraṃ, avijjā paramaṃ malaṃ.
etaṃ malaṃ pahantvāna, nimmalā hotha bhikkhavo.

A worse taint than these is ignorance, the worst of all taints. Destroy this one taint and become taintless, O monks!
#244-245
sujīvaṃ ahirikena, kākasūrena dhaṃsinā.
pakkhandinā pagabbhena, saṃkiliṭṭhena jīvitaṃ.

hirīmatā ca dujjīvaṃ, niccaṃ sucigavesinā.
alīnenāppagabbhena, suddhājīvena passatā.

Easy is life for the shameless one who is impudent as a crow, is backbiting and forward, arrogant and corrupt.
Difficult is life for the modest one who always seeks purity, is detached and unassuming, clean in life, and discerning.
#246-247
yo pāṇamatipāteti, musāvādañca bhāsati.
loke adinnamādiyati, paradārañca gacchati.

surāmerayapānañca, yo naro anuyuñjati.
idhevameso lokasmiṃ, mūlaṃ khaṇati attano.

One who destroys life, utters lies, takes what is not given, goes to another man's wife, and is addicted to intoxicating drinks - such a man digs up his own root even in this world.
#248
evaṃ bho purisa jānāhi, pāpadhammā asaññatā.
mā taṃ lobho adhammo ca, ciraṃ dukkhāya randhayuṃ.

Know this, O good man: evil things are difficult to control. Let not greed and wickedness drag you to protracted misery.
#249-250
dadāti ve yathāsaddhaṃ, yathāpasādanaṃ jano.
tattha yo maṅku bhavati, paresaṃ pānabhojane.
na so divā vā rattiṃ vā, samādhimadhigacchati.

yassa cetaṃ samucchinnaṃ, mūlaghaccaṃ samūhataṃ.
sa ve divā vā rattiṃ vā, samādhimadhigacchati.

People give according to their faith or regard. If one becomes discontented with the food and drink given by others, one does not attain meditative absorption, either by day or by night.
But he in who this (discontent) is fully destroyed, uprooted and extinct, he attains absorption, both by day and by night.
#251
natthi rāgasamo aggi, natthi dosasamo gaho.
natthi mohasamaṃ jālaṃ, natthi taṇhāsamā nadī.

There is no fire like lust; there is no grip like hatred; there is no net like delusion; there is no river like craving.
#252
sudassaṃ vajjamaññesaṃ, attano pana duddasaṃ.
paresaṃ hi so vajjāni, opunāti yathā bhusaṃ.
attano pana chādeti, kaliṃva kitavā saṭho.

Easily seen is the fault of others, but one's own fault is difficult to see. Like chaff one winnows another's faults, but hides one's own, even as a crafty fowler hides behind sham branches.
#253
paravajjānupassissa, niccaṃ ujjhānasaññino.
āsavā tassa vaḍḍhanti, ārā so āsavakkhayā.

He who seeks another's faults, who is ever censorious - his cankers grow. He is far from destruction of the cankers.
#254
ākāseva padaṃ natthi, samaṇo natthi bāhire.
papañcābhiratā pajā, nippapañcā tathāgatā.

There is no track in the sky, and no recluse outside (the Buddha's dispensation). Mankind delights in worldliness, but the Buddhas are free from worldliness.
#255
ākāseva padaṃ natthi, samaṇo natthi bāhire.
saṅkhārā sassatā natthi, natthi buddhānamiñjitaṃ.

There is not track in the sky, and no recluse outside (the Buddha's dispensation). There are no conditioned things that are eternal, and no instability in the Buddhas.
*Dhammatthavagga: The Judge
#256-257
na tena hoti dhammaṭṭho, yenatthaṃ sāhasā naye.
yo ca atthaṃ anatthañca, ubho niccheyya paṇḍito.

asāhasena dhammena, samena nayatī pare.
dhammassa gutto medhāvī, 'dhammaṭṭho'ti pavuccati.

Not by passing arbitrary judgments does a man become just; a wise man is he who investigates both right and wrong.
He who does not judge others arbitrarily, but passes judgment impartially according to the truth, that sagacious man is a guardian of law and is called just.
#258
na tena paṇḍito hoti, yāvatā bahu bhāsati.
khemī averī abhayo, 'paṇḍito'ti pavuccati.

One is not wise because one speaks much. He who is peaceable, friendly and fearless is called wise.
#259
na tāvatā dhammadharo, yāvatā bahu bhāsati.
yo ca appampi sutvāna, dhammaṃ kāyena passati.
sa ve dhammadharo hoti, yo dhammaṃ nappamajjati.

A man is not versed in Dhamma because he speaks much. He who, after hearing a little Dhamma, realizes its truth directly and is not heedless of it, is truly versed in the Dhamma.
#260-261
na tena thero so hoti, yenassa palitaṃ siro.
paripakko vayo tassa, 'moghajiṇṇo'ti vuccati.

yamhi saccañca dhammo ca, ahiṃsā saṃyamo damo.
sa ve vantamalo dhīro, 'thero' iti pavuccati.

A monk is not Elder because his head is gray. He is but ripe in age, and he is called one grown old in vain.
One in whom there is truthfulness, virtue, inoffensiveness, restraint and self-mastery, who is free from defilements and is wise - he is truly called an Elder.
#262-263
na vākkaraṇamattena, vaṇṇapokkharatāya vā.
sādhurūpo naro hoti, issukī maccharī saṭho.

yassa cetaṃ samucchinnaṃ, mūlaghaccaṃ samūhataṃ.
sa vantadoso medhāvī, 'sādhurūpo'ti vuccati.

Not by mere eloquence nor by beauty of form does a man become accomplished, if he is jealous, selfish and deceitful.
But he in whom these are wholly destroyed, uprooted and extinct, and who has cast out hatred - that wise man is truly accomplished.
#264-265
na muṇḍakena samaṇo, abbato alikaṃ bhaṇaṃ.
icchālobhasamāpanno, samaṇo kiṃ bhavissati.

yo ca sameti pāpāni, aṇuṃ thūlāni sabbaso.
samitattā hi pāpānaṃ, 'samaṇo'ti pavuccati.

Not by shaven head does a man who is indisciplined and untruthful become a monk. How can he who is full of desire and greed be a monk?
He who wholly subdues evil both small and great is called a monk, because he has overcome all evil.
#266-267
na tena bhikkhu so hoti, yāvatā bhikkhate pare.
vissaṃ dhammaṃ samādāya, bhikkhu hoti na tāvatā.

yodha puññañca pāpañca, bāhetvā brahmacariyavā.
saṅkhāya loke carati, sa ve 'bhikkhū'ti vuccati.

He is not a monk just because he lives on others' alms. Not by adopting outward form does one become a true monk.
Whoever here (in the Dispensation) lives a holy life, transcending both merit and demerit, and walks with understanding in this world - he is truly called a monk.
#268-269
na monena munī hoti, mūḷharūpo aviddasu.
yo ca tulaṃva paggayha, varamādāya paṇḍito.

pāpāni parivajjeti, sa munī tena so muni.
yo munāti ubho loke, 'muni' tena pavuccati.

Not by observing silence does one become a sage, if he be foolish and ignorant. But that man is wise who, as if holding a balance-scale accepts only the good.
The sage (thus) rejecting the evil, is truly a sage. Since he comprehends both (present and future) worlds, he is called a sage.
#270
na tena ariyo hoti, yena pāṇāni hiṃsati.
ahiṃsā sabbapāṇānaṃ, 'ariyo'ti pavuccati.

He is not noble who injures living beings. He is called noble because he is harmless towards all living beings.
#271-272
na sīlabbatamattena, bāhusaccena vā pana.
atha vā samādhilābhena, vivittasayanena vā.

phusāmi nekkhammasukhaṃ, aputhujjanasevitaṃ.
bhikkhu vissāsamāpādi, appatto āsavakkhayaṃ.

Not by rules and observances, not even by much learning, nor by gain of absorption, nor by a life of seclusion, nor by thinking, 'I enjoy the bliss of renunciation, which is not experienced by the worldling' should you, O monks, rest content, until the utter destruction of cankers (Arahantship) is reached.
*Maggavagga: The Path
#273
maggānaṭṭhaṅgiko seṭṭho, saccānaṃ caturo padā.
virāgo seṭṭho dhammānaṃ, dvipadānañca cakkhumā.

Of all the paths the Eightfold Path is the best; of all the truths the Four Noble Truths are the best; of all things passionlessness is the best: of men the Seeing One (the Buddha) is the best.
#274
eseva maggo natthañño, dassanassa visuddhiyā.
etañhi tumhe paṭipajjatha, mārassetaṃ pamohanaṃ.

This is the only path; there is none other for the purification of insight. Tread this path, and you will bewilder Mara.
#275
etañhi tumhe paṭipannā, dukkhassantaṃ karissatha.
akkhāto vo mayā maggo, aññāya sallakantanaṃ.

Walking upon this path you will make an end of suffering. Having discovered how to pull out the thorn of lust, I make known the path.
#276
tumhehi kiccamātappaṃ, akkhātāro tathāgatā.
paṭipannā pamokkhanti, jhāyino mārabandhanā.

You yourselves must strive; the Buddhas only point the way. Those meditative ones who tread the path are released from the bonds of Mara.
#277
'sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā'ti, yadā paññāya passati.
atha nibbindati dukkhe, esa maggo visuddhiyā.

'All conditioned things are impermanent' - when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.
#278
'sabbe saṅkhārā dukkhā'ti, yadā paññāya passati.
atha nibbindati dukkhe, esa maggo visuddhiyā.

'All conditioned things are unsatisfactory' - when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.
#279
'sabbe dhammā anattā'ti, yadā paññāya passati.
atha nibbindati dukkhe, esa maggo visuddhiyā.

'All things are not-self' - when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.
#280
uṭṭhānakālamhi anuṭṭhahāno, yuvā balī ālasiyaṃ upeto.
saṃsannasaṅkappamano kusīto, paññāya maggaṃ alaso na vindati.

The idler who does not exert himself when he should, who though young and strong is full of sloth, with a mind full of vain thoughts - such an indolent man does not find the path to wisdom.
#281
vācānurakkhī manasā susaṃvuto, kāyena ca nākusalaṃ kayirā.
ete tayo kammapathe visodhaye, ārādhaye maggamisippaveditaṃ.

Let a man be watchful of speech, well controlled in mind, and not commit evil in bodily action. Let him purify these three courses of action, and win the path made known by the Great Sage.
#282
yogā ve jāyatī bhūri, ayogā bhūrisaṅkhayo.
etaṃ dvedhāpathaṃ ñatvā, bhavāya vibhavāya ca.
tathāttānaṃ niveseyya, yathā bhūri pavaḍḍhati.

Wisdom springs from meditation; without meditation wisdom wanes. Having known these two paths of progress and decline, let a man so conduct himself that his wisdom may increase.
#283
vanaṃ chindatha mā rukkhaṃ, vanato jāyate bhayaṃ.
chetvā vanañca vanathañca, nibbanā hotha bhikkhavo.

Cut down the forest (lust), but not the tree; from the forest springs fear. Having cut down the forest and the underbrush (desire), be passionless, O monks!
#284
yāva hi vanatho na chijjati, aṇumattopi narassa nārisu.
paṭibaddhamanova tāva so, vaccho khīrapakova mātari.

For so long as the underbrush of desire, even the most subtle, of a man towards a woman is not cut down, his mind is in bondage, like the sucking calf to its mother.
#285
ucchinda sinehamattano kumudaṃ sāradikaṃva.
santimaggameva brūhaya, nibbānaṃ sugatena desitaṃ.

Cut off your affection in the manner of a man plucks with his hand an autumn lotus. Cultivate only the path to peace, Nibbana, as made known by the Exalted One.
#286
idha vassaṃ vasissāmi, idha hemantagimhisu.
iti bālo vicinteti, antarāyaṃ na bujjhati.

'Here shall I live during the rains, here in winter and summer' - thus thinks the fool. He does not realize the danger (that death might intervene).
#287
taṃ puttapasusammattaṃ, byāsattamanasaṃ naraṃ.
suttaṃ gāmaṃ mahoghova, maccu ādāya gacchati.

As a great flood carries away a sleeping village, so death seizes and carries away the man with a clinging mind, doting on his children and cattle.
#288
na santi puttā tāṇāya, na pitā nāpi bandhavā.
antakenādhipannassa, natthi ñātīsu tāṇatā.

For him who is assailed by death there is no protection by kinsmen. None there are to save him - no sons, nor father, nor relatives.
#289
etamatthavasaṃ ñatvā, paṇḍito sīlasaṃvuto.
nibbānagamanaṃ maggaṃ, khippameva visodhaye.

Realizing this fact, let the wise man, restrained by morality, hasten to clear the path leading to Nibbana.
*Pakinnakavagga: Miscellany
#290
mattāsukhapariccāgā, passe ce vipulaṃ sukhaṃ.
caje mattāsukhaṃ dhīro, sampassaṃ vipulaṃ sukhaṃ.

If by renouncing a lesser happiness one may realize a greater happiness, let the wise man renounce the lesser, having regard for the greater.
#291
paradukkhūpadhānena, attano sukhamicchati.
verasaṃsaggasaṃsaṭṭho, verā so na parimuccati.

Entangled by the bonds of hate, he who seeks his own happiness by inflicting pain on others, is never delivered from hatred.
#292-293
yañhi kiccaṃ apaviddhaṃ, akiccaṃ pana kayirati.
unnaḷānaṃ pamattānaṃ, tesaṃ vaḍḍhanti āsavā.

yesañca susamāraddhā, niccaṃ kāyagatā sati.
akiccaṃ te na sevanti, kicce sātaccakārino.
satānaṃ sampajānānaṃ, atthaṃ gacchanti āsavā.

The cankers only increase for those who are arrogant and heedless, who leave undone what should be done and do what should not be done.
The cankers cease for those mindful and clearly comprehending ones who always earnestly practice mindfulness of the body, who do not resort to what should not be done, and steadfastly pursue what should be done.
#294
mātaraṃ pitaraṃ hantvā, rājāno dve ca khattiye.
raṭṭhaṃ sānucaraṃ hantvā, anīgho yāti brāhmaṇo.

Having slain mother (craving), father (self-conceit), two warrior-kings (eternalism and nihilism), and destroyed a country (sense organs and sense objects) together with its treasurer (attachment and lust), ungrieving goes the holy man.
#295
mātaraṃ pitaraṃ hantvā, rājāno dve ca sotthiye.
veyagghapañcamaṃ hantvā, anīgho yāti brāhmaṇo.

Having slain mother, father, two brahman kings (two extreme views), and a tiger as the fifth (the five mental hindrances), ungrieving goes the holy man.
#296
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, niccaṃ buddhagatā sati.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who day and night constantly practice the Recollection of the Qualities of the Buddha.
#297
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, niccaṃ dhammagatā sati.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who day and night constantly practice the Recollection of the Qualities of the Dhamma.
#298
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, niccaṃ saṅghagatā sati.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who day and night constantly practice the Recollection of the Qualities of the Sangha.
#299
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, niccaṃ kāyagatā sati.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who day and night constantly practice Mindfulness of the Body.
#300
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, ahiṃsāya rato mano.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily whose minds by day and night delight in the practice of non-violence.
#301
suppabuddhaṃ pabujjhanti, sadā gotamasāvakā.
yesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, bhāvanāya rato mano.

Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily whose minds by day and night delight in the practice of meditation.
#302
duppabbajjaṃ durabhiramaṃ, durāvāsā gharā dukhā.
dukkhosamānasaṃvāso, dukkhānupatitaddhagū.
tasmā na caddhagū siyā, na ca dukkhānupatito siyā.

Difficult is life as a monk; difficult is it to delight therein. Also difficult and sorrowful is the household life. Suffering comes from association with unequals; suffering comes from wandering in samsara. Therefore, be not an aimless wanderer, be not a pursuer of suffering.
#303
saddho sīlena sampanno, yasobhogasamappito.
yaṃ yaṃ padesaṃ bhajati, tattha tattheva pūjito.

He who is full of faith and virtue, and possesses good repute and wealth - he is respected everywhere, in whatever land he travels.
#304
dūre santo pakāsenti, himavantova pabbato.
asantettha na dissanti, rattiṃ khittā yathā sarā.

The good shine from afar, like the Himalaya mountains. But the wicked are unseen, like arrows shot in the night.
#305
ekāsanaṃ ekaseyyaṃ, eko caramatandito.
eko damayamattānaṃ, vanante ramito siyā.

He who sits alone, sleeps alone, and walks alone, who is strenuous and subdues himself alone, will find delight in the solitude of the forest.
*Nirayavagga: Hell
#306
abhūtavādī nirayaṃ upeti, yo vāpi katvā na karomi cāha.
ubhopi te pecca samā bhavanti, nihīnakammā manujā parattha.

The liar goes to the state of woe; also he who, having done (wrong), says, 'I did not do it.' Men of base actions both, on departing they share the same destiny in the other world.
#307
kāsāvakaṇṭhā bahavo, pāpadhammā asaññatā.
pāpā pāpehi kammehi, nirayaṃ te upapajjare.

There are many evil characters and uncontrolled men wearing the saffron robe. These wicked men will be born in states of woe because of their evil deeds.
#308
seyyo ayoguḷo bhutto, tatto aggisikhūpamo.
yañce bhuñjeyya dussīlo, raṭṭhapiṇḍamasaññato.

It would be better to swallow a red-hot iron ball, blazing like fire, than as an immoral and uncontrolled monk to eat the alms of the people.
#309
cattāri ṭhānāni naro pamatto, āpajjati paradārūpasevī.
apuññalābhaṃ na nikāmaseyyaṃ, nindaṃ tatīyaṃ nirayaṃ catutthaṃ.

Four misfortunes befall the reckless man who consorts with another's wife: acquisition of demerit, disturbed sleep, ill-repute, and (rebirth in) states of woe.
#310
apuññalābho ca gatī ca pāpikā, bhītassa bhītāya ratī ca thokikā.
rājā ca daṇḍaṃ garukaṃ paṇeti, tasmā naro paradāraṃ na seve.

Such a man acquires demerit and an unhappy birth in the future. Brief is the pleasure of the frightened man and woman, and the king imposes heavy punishment. Hence, let no man consort with another's wife.
#311
kuso yathā duggahito, hatthamevānukantati.
sāmaññaṃ dupparāmaṭṭhaṃ, nirayāyupakaḍḍhati.

Just as kusa grass wrongly handled cuts the hand, even so, a recluse's life wrongly lived drags one to states of woe.
#312
yaṃ kiñci sithilaṃ kammaṃ, saṃkiliṭṭhañca yaṃ vataṃ.
saṅkassaraṃ brahmacariyaṃ, na taṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.

Any loose act, any corrupt observance, any life of questionable celibacy - none of these bear much fruit.
#313
kayirā ce kayirāthenaṃ, daḷhamenaṃ parakkame.
sithilo hi paribbājo, bhiyyo ākirate rajaṃ.

If anything is to be done, let one do it with sustained vigor. A lax monastic life stirs up the dust of passions all the more.
#314
akataṃ dukkaṭaṃ seyyo, pacchā tappati dukkaṭaṃ.
katañca sukataṃ seyyo, yaṃ katvā nānutappati.

An evil deed is better left undone, for such a deed torments one afterwards. But a good deed is better done, doing which one repents not later.
#315
nagaraṃ yathā paccantaṃ, guttaṃ santarabāhiraṃ.
evaṃ gopetha attānaṃ, khaṇo vo mā upaccagā.
khaṇātītā hi socanti, nirayamhi samappitā.

Just as a border city is closely guarded both within and without, even so, guard yourself. Do not let slip this opportunity (for spiritual growth). For those who let slip this opportunity grieve indeed when consigned to hell.
#316
alajjitāye lajjanti, lajjitāye na lajjare.
micchādiṭṭhisamādānā, sattā gacchanti duggatiṃ.

Those who are ashamed of what they should not be ashamed of, and are not ashamed of what they should be ashamed of - upholding false views, they go to states of woe.
#317
abhaye bhayadassino, bhaye cābhayadassino.
micchādiṭṭhisamādānā, sattā gacchanti duggatiṃ.

Those who see something to fear where there is nothing to fear, and see nothing to fear where there is something to fear - upholding false views, they go to states of woe.
#318
avajje vajjamatino, vajje cāvajjadassino.
micchādiṭṭhisamādānā, sattā gacchanti duggatiṃ.

Those who imagine evil where there is none, and do not see evil where it is - upholding false views, they go to states of woe.
#319
vajjañca vajjato ñatvā, avajjañca avajjato.
sammādiṭṭhisamādānā, sattā gacchanti suggatiṃ.

Those who discern the wrong as wrong and the right as right - upholding right views, they go to realms of bliss.
*Nagavagga: Elephants
#320
ahaṃ nāgova saṅgāme, cāpato patitaṃ saraṃ.
ativākyaṃ titikkhissaṃ, dussīlo hi bahujjano.

As an elephant in the battlefield withstands arrows shot from bows all around, even so shall I endure abuse. There are many, indeed, who lack virtue.
#321
dantaṃ nayanti samitiṃ, dantaṃ rājābhirūhati.
danto seṭṭho manussesu, yotivākyaṃ titikkhati.

A tamed elephant is led into a crowd, and the king mounts a tamed elephant. Best among men is the subdued one who endures abuse.
#322
varamassatarā dantā, ājānīyā ca sindhavā.
kuñjarā ca mahānāgā, attadanto tato varaṃ.

Excellent are well-trained mules, thoroughbred Sindhu horses and noble tusker elephants. But better still is the man who has subdued himself.
#323
na hi etehi yānehi, gaccheyya agataṃ disaṃ.
yathāttanā sudantena, danto dantena gacchati.

Not by these mounts, however, would one go to the Untrodden Land (Nibbana), as one who is self-tamed goes by his own tamed and well-controlled mind.
#324
dhanapālo nāma kuñjaro, kaṭukabhedano dunnivārayo.
baddho kabaḷaṃ na bhuñjati, sumarati nāgavanassa kuñjaro.

Musty during rut, the tusker named Dhanapalaka is uncontrollable. Held in captivity, the tusker does not touch a morsel, but only longingly calls to mind the elephant forest.
#325
middhī yadā hoti mahagghaso ca, niddāyitā samparivattasāyī.
mahāvarāhova nivāpapuṭṭho, punappunaṃ gabbhamupeti mando.

When a man is sluggish and gluttonous, sleeping and rolling around in bed like a fat domestic pig, that sluggard undergoes rebirth again and again.
#326
idaṃ pure cittamacāri cārikaṃ, yenicchakaṃ yatthakāmaṃ yathāsukhaṃ.
tadajjahaṃ niggahessāmi yoniso, hatthippabhinnaṃ viya aṅkusaggaho.

Formerly this mind wandered about as it liked, where it wished and according to its pleasure, but now I shall thoroughly master it with wisdom as a mahout controls with his ankus an elephant in rut.
#327
appamādaratā hotha, sacittamanurakkhatha.
duggā uddharathattānaṃ, paṅke sannova kuñjaro.

Delight in heedfulness! Guard well your thoughts! Draw yourself out of this bog of evil, even as an elephant draws himself out of the mud.
#328
sace labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ.
abhibhuyya sabbāni parissayāni, careyya tenattamano satīmā.

If for company you find a wise and prudent friend who leads a good life, you should, overcoming all impediments, keep his company joyously and mindfully.
#329
no ce labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ.
rājāva raṭṭhaṃ vijitaṃ pahāya, eko care mātaṅgaraññeva nāgo.

If for company you cannot find a wise and prudent friend who leads a good life, then, like a king who leaves behind a conquered kingdom, or like a lone elephant in the elephant forest, you should go your way alone.
#330
ekassa caritaṃ seyyo, natthi bāle sahāyatā.
eko care na ca pāpāni kayirā, appossukko mātaṅgaraññeva nāgo.

Better it is to live alone; there is no fellowship with a fool. Live alone and do no evil; be carefree like an elephant in the elephant forest.
#331
atthamhi jātamhi sukhā sahāyā, tuṭṭhī sukhā yā itarītarena.
puññaṃ sukhaṃ jīvitasaṅkhayamhi, sabbassa dukkhassa sukhaṃ pahānaṃ.

Good are friends when need arises; good is contentment with just what one has; good is merit when life is at an end, and good is the abandoning of all suffering (through Arahantship).
#332
sukhā matteyyatā loke, atho petteyyatā sukhā.
sukhā sāmaññatā loke, atho brahmaññatā sukhā.

In this world, good it is to serve one's mother, good it is to serve one's father, good it is to serve the monks, and good it is to serve the holy men.
#333
sukhaṃ yāva jarā sīlaṃ, sukhā saddhā patiṭṭhitā.
sukho paññāya paṭilābho, pāpānaṃ akaraṇaṃ sukhaṃ.

Good is virtue until life's end, good is faith that is steadfast, good is the acquisition of wisdom, and good is the avoidance of evil.
*Tanhavagga: Craving
#334
manujassa pamattacārino, taṇhā vaḍḍhati māluvā viya.
so plavatī hurā huraṃ, phalamicchaṃva vanasmi vānaro.

The craving of one given to heedless living grows like a creeper. Like the monkey seeking fruits in the forest, he leaps from life to life (tasting the fruit of his kamma).
#335
yaṃ esā sahate jammī, taṇhā loke visattikā.
sokā tassa pavaḍḍhanti, abhivaṭṭhaṃva bīraṇaṃ.

Whoever is overcome by this wretched and sticky craving, his sorrows grow like grass after the rains.
#336
yo cetaṃ sahate jammiṃ, taṇhaṃ loke duraccayaṃ.
sokā tamhā papatanti, udabinduva pokkharā.

But whoever overcomes this wretched craving, so difficult to overcome, from him sorrows fall away like water from a lotus leaf.
#337
taṃ vo vadāmi bhaddaṃ vo, yāvantettha samāgatā.
taṇhāya mūlaṃ khaṇatha, usīratthova bīraṇaṃ.
mā vo naḷaṃva sotova, māro bhañji punappunaṃ.

This I say to you: Good luck to all assembled here! Dig up the root of craving, like one in search of the fragrant root of the birana grass. Let not Mara crush you again and again, as a flood crushes a reed.
#338
yathāpi mūle anupaddave daḷhe, chinnopi rukkho punareva rūhati.
evampi taṇhānusaye anūhate, nibbattatī dukkhamidaṃ punappunaṃ.

Just as a tree, though cut down, sprouts up again if its roots remain uncut and firm, even so, until the craving that lies dormant is rooted out, suffering springs up again and again.
#339
yassa chattiṃsati sotā, manāpasavanā bhusā.
māhā vahanti duddiṭṭhiṃ, saṅkappā rāganissitā.

The misguided man in whom the thirty-six currents of craving strongly rush toward pleasurable objects, is swept away by the flood of his passionate thoughts.
#340
savanti sabbadhi sotā, latā uppajja tiṭṭhati.
tañca disvā lataṃ jātaṃ, mūlaṃ paññāya chindatha.

Everywhere these currents flow, and the creeper (of craving) sprouts and grows. Seeing that the creeper has sprung up, cut off its root with wisdom.
#341
saritāni sinehitāni ca, somanassāni bhavanti jantuno.
te sātasitā sukhesino, te ve jātijarūpagā narā.

Flowing in (from all objects) and watered by craving, feelings of pleasure arise in beings. Bent on pleasures and seeking enjoyment, these men fall prey to birth and decay.
#342
tasiṇāya purakkhatā pajā, parisappanti sasova bandhito.
saṃyojanasaṅgasattakā, dukkhamupenti punappunaṃ cirāya.

Beset by craving, people run about like an entrapped hare. Held fast by mental fetters, they come to suffering again and again for a long time.
#343
tasiṇāya purakkhatā pajā, parisappanti sasova bandhito.
tasmā tasiṇaṃ vinodaye, ākaṅkhanta virāgamattano.

Beset by craving, people run about like an entrapped hare. Therefore, one who yearns to be passion-free should destroy his own craving.
#344
yo nibbanatho vanādhimutto, vanamutto vanameva dhāvati.
taṃ puggalametha passatha, mutto bandhanameva dhāvati.

There is one who, turning away from desire (for household life) takes to the life of the forest (i.e., of a monk). But after being freed from the household, he runs back to it. Behold that man! Though freed, he runs back to that very bondage!
#345-346
na taṃ daḷhaṃ bandhanamāhu dhīrā, yadāyasaṃ dārujapabbajañca.
sārattarattā maṇikuṇḍalesu, puttesu dāresu ca yā apekkhā.

etaṃ daḷhaṃ bandhanamāhu dhīrā, ohārinaṃ sithilaṃ duppamuñcaṃ.
etampi chetvāna paribbajanti, anapekkhino kāmasukhaṃ pahāya.

That is not a strong fetter, the wise say, which is made of iron, wood or hemp. But the infatuation and longing for jewels and ornaments, children and wives - that, they say, is a far stronger fetter, which pulls one downward and, though seemingly loose, is hard to remove. This, too, the wise cut off. Giving up sensual pleasure, and without any longing, they renounce the world.
#347
ye rāgarattānupatanti sotaṃ, sayaṃkataṃ makkaṭakova jālaṃ.
etampi chetvāna vajanti dhīrā, anapekkhino sabbadukkhaṃ pahāya.

Those who are lust-infatuated fall back into the swirling current (of samsara) like a spider on its self-spun web. This, too, the wise cut off. Without any longing, they abandon all suffering and renounce the world.
#348
muñca pure muñca pacchato, majjhe muñca bhavassa pāragū.
sabbattha vimuttamānaso, na punaṃ jātijaraṃ upehisi.

Let go of the past, let go of the future, let go of the present, and cross over to the farther shore of existence. With mind wholly liberated, you shall come no more to birth and death.
#349-351
vitakkamathitassa jantuno, tibbarāgassa subhānupassino.
bhiyyo taṇhā pavaḍḍhati, esa kho daḷhaṃ karoti bandhanaṃ.

vitakkūpasame ca yo rato, asubhaṃ bhāvayate sadā sato.
esa kho byanti kāhiti, esa checchati mārabandhanaṃ.

niṭṭhaṅgato asantāsī, vītataṇho anaṅgaṇo.
acchindi bhavasallāni, antimoyaṃ samussayo.

For a person tormented by evil thoughts, who is passion-dominated and given to the pursuit of pleasure, his craving steadily grows. He makes the fetter strong, indeed.
He who delights in subduing evil thoughts, who meditates on the impurities and is ever mindful - it is he who will make an end of craving and rend asunder Mara's fetter.
He who has reached the goal, is fearless, free from craving, passionless, and has plucked out the thorns of existence - for him this is the last body.
#352
vītataṇho anādāno, niruttipadakovido.
akkharānaṃ sannipātaṃ, jaññā pubbāparāni ca.
sa ve 'antimasārīro, mahāpañño mahāpuriso'ti vuccati.

He who is free from craving and attachment, is perfect in uncovering the true meaning of the Teaching, and knows the arrangement of the sacred texts in correct sequence - he, indeed, is the bearer of his final body. He is truly called the profoundly wise one, the great man.
#353
sabbābhibhū sabbavidūhamasmi, sabbesu dhammesu anūpalitto.
sabbañjaho taṇhakkhaye vimutto, sayaṃ abhiññāya kamuddiseyyaṃ.

A victor am I over all, all have I known. Yet unattached am I to all that is conquered and known. Abandoning all, I am freed through the destruction of craving. Having thus directly comprehended all by myself, whom shall I call my teacher?
#354
sabbadānaṃ dhammadānaṃ jināti, sabbarasaṃ dhammaraso jināti.
sabbaratiṃ dhammarati jināti, taṇhakkhayo sabbadukkhaṃ jināti.

The gift of Dhamma excels all gifts; the taste of the Dhamma excels all tastes; the delight in Dhamma excels all delights. The Craving-Freed vanquishes all suffering.
#355
hananti bhogā dummedhaṃ, no ca pāragavesino.
bhogataṇhāya dummedho, hanti aññeva attanaṃ.

Riches ruin only the foolish, not those in quest of the Beyond. By craving for riches the witless man ruins himself as well as others.
#356
tiṇadosāni khettāni, rāgadosā ayaṃ pajā.
tasmā hi vītarāgesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.

Weeds are the bane of fields, lust is the bane of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those free of lust yields abundant fruit.
#357
tiṇadosāni khettāni, dosadosā ayaṃ pajā.
tasmā hi vītadosesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.

Weeds are the bane of fields, hatred is the bane of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those free of hatred yields abundant fruit.
#358
tiṇadosāni khettāni, mohadosā ayaṃ pajā.
tasmā hi vītamohesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.

Weeds are the bane of fields, delusion is the bane of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those free of delusion yields abundant fruit.
#359
(tiṇadosāni khettāni, icchādosā ayaṃ pajā.
tasmā hi vigaticchesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.)
tiṇadosāni khettāni, taṇhādosā ayaṃ pajā.
tasmā hi vītataṇhesu, dinnaṃ hoti mahapphalaṃ.

Weeds are the bane of fields, desire is the bane of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those free of desire yields abundant fruit.
*Bhikkhuvagga: Monks
#360
cakkhunā saṃvaro sādhu, sādhu sotena saṃvaro.
ghānena saṃvaro sādhu, sādhu jivhāya saṃvaro.

Good is restraint over the eye; good is restraint over the ear; good is restraint over the nose; good is restraint over the tongue.
#361
kāyena saṃvaro sādhu, sādhu vācāya saṃvaro.
manasā saṃvaro sādhu, sādhu sabbattha saṃvaro.
sabbattha saṃvuto bhikkhu, sabbadukkhā pamuccati.

Good is restraint in the body; good is restraint in speech; good is restraint in thought. Restraint everywhere is good. The monk restrained in every way is freed from all suffering.
#362
hatthasaṃyato pādasaṃyato, vācāsaṃyato saṃyatuttamo.
ajjhattarato samāhito, eko santusito tamāhu bhikkhuṃ.

He who has control over his hands, feet and tongue; who is fully controlled, delights in inward development, is absorbed in meditation, keeps to himself and is contented - him do people call a monk.
#363
yo mukhasaṃyato bhikkhu, mantabhāṇī anuddhato.
atthaṃ dhammañca dīpeti, madhuraṃ tassa bhāsitaṃ.

That monk who has control over his tongue, is moderate in speech, unassuming and who explains the Teaching in both letter and spirit - whatever he says is pleasing.
#364
dhammārāmo dhammarato, dhammaṃ anuvicintayaṃ.
dhammaṃ anussaraṃ bhikkhu, saddhammā na parihāyati.

The monk who abides in the Dhamma, delights in the Dhamma, meditates on the Dhamma, and bears the Dhamma well in mind - he does not fall away from the sublime Dhamma.
#365
salābhaṃ nātimaññeyya, nāññesaṃ pihayaṃ care.
aññesaṃ pihayaṃ bhikkhu, samādhiṃ nādhigacchati.

One should not despise what one has received, nor envy the gains of others. The monk who envies the gains of others does not attain to meditative absorption.
#366
appalābhopi ce bhikkhu, salābhaṃ nātimaññati.
taṃ ve devā pasaṃsanti, suddhājīviṃ atanditaṃ.

A monk who does not despise what he has received, even though it be little, who is pure in livelihood and unremitting in effort - him even the gods praise.
#367
sabbaso nāmarūpasmiṃ, yassa natthi mamāyitaṃ.
asatā ca na socati, sa ve 'bhikkhū'ti vuccati.

He who has no attachment whatsoever for the mind and body, who does not grieve for what he has not - he is truly called a monk.
#368
mettāvihārī yo bhikkhu, pasanno buddhasāsane.
adhigacche padaṃ santaṃ, saṅkhārūpasamaṃ sukhaṃ.

The monk who abides in universal love and is deeply devoted to the Teaching of the Buddha attains the peace of Nibbana, the bliss of the cessation of all conditioned things.
#369
siñca bhikkhu imaṃ nāvaṃ, sittā te lahumessati.
chetvā rāgañca dosañca, tato nibbānamehisi.

Empty this boat, O monk! Emptied, it will sail lightly. Rid of lust and hatred, you shall reach Nibbana.
#370
pañca chinde pañca jahe, pañca cuttari bhāvaye.
pañca saṅgātigo bhikkhu, 'oghatiṇṇo'ti vuccati.

Cut off the five, abandon the five, and cultivate the five. The monk who has overcome the five bonds is called one who has crossed the flood.
#371
jhāya bhikkhu mā pamādo, mā te kāmaguṇe ramessu cittaṃ.
mā lohaguḷaṃ gilī pamatto, mā kandi 'dukkhamida'nti ḍayhamāno.

Meditate, O monk! Do not be heedless. Let not your mind whirl on sensual pleasures. Heedless, do not swallow a red-hot iron ball, lest you cry when burning, 'O this is painful!'
#372
natthi jhānaṃ apaññassa, paññā natthi ajhāyato.
yamhi jhānañca paññā ca, sa ve nibbānasantike.

There is no meditative concentration for him who lacks insight, and no insight for him who lacks meditative concentration. He in whom are found both meditative concentration and insight, indeed, is close to Nibbana.
#373
suññāgāraṃ paviṭṭhassa, santacittassa bhikkhuno.
amānusī rati hoti, sammā dhammaṃ vipassato.

The monk who has retired to a solitary abode and calmed his mind, who comprehends the Dhamma with insight, in him there arises a delight that transcends all human delights.
#374
yato yato sammasati, khandhānaṃ udayabbayaṃ.
labhatī pītipāmojjaṃ, amataṃ taṃ vijānataṃ.

Whenever he sees with insight the rise and fall of the aggregates, he is full of joy and happiness. To the discerning one this reflects the Deathless.
#375-376
tatrāyamādi bhavati, idha paññassa bhikkhuno.
indriyagutti santuṭṭhi, pātimokkhe ca saṃvaro.

mitte bhajassu kalyāṇe, suddhājīve atandite.
paṭisanthāravutyassa, ācārakusalo siyā.
tato pāmojjabahulo, dukkhassantaṃ karissati.

Control of the senses, contentment, restraint according to the code of monastic discipline - these form the basis of holy life here for the wise monk.
Let him associate with friends who are noble, energetic, and pure in life, let him be cordial and refined in conduct. Thus, full of joy, he will make an end of suffering.
#377
vassikā viya pupphāni, maddavāni pamuñcati.
evaṃ rāgañca dosañca, vippamuñcetha bhikkhavo.

Just as the jasmine creeper sheds its withered flowers, even so, O monks, should you totally shed lust and hatred!
#378
santakāyo santavāco, santavā susamāhito.
vantalokāmiso bhikkhu, 'upasanto'ti vuccati.

The monk who is calm in body, calm in speech, calm in thought, well-composed and who has spewn out worldliness - he, truly, is called serene.
#379
attanā codayattānaṃ, paṭimaṃsetha attanā.
so attagutto satimā, sukhaṃ bhikkhu vihāhisi.

By oneself one must censure oneself and scrutinize oneself . The self-guarded and mindful monk will always live in happiness.
#380
attā hi attano nātho, (ko hi nātho paro siyā)
attā hi attano gati.
tasmā saṃyamamattānaṃ, assaṃ bhadraṃva vāṇijo.

One is one's own protector, one is one's own refuge. Therefore, one should control oneself, even as a trader controls a noble steed.
#381
pāmojjabahulo bhikkhu, pasanno buddhasāsane.
adhigacche padaṃ santaṃ, saṅkhārūpasamaṃ sukhaṃ.

Full of joy, full of faith in the Teaching of the Buddha, the monk attains the Peaceful State, the bliss of cessation of conditioned things.
#382
yo have daharo bhikkhu, yuñjati buddhasāsane.
somaṃ lokaṃ pabhāseti, abbhā muttova candimā.

That monk who while young devotes himself to the Teaching of the Buddha illumines this world like the moon freed from clouds.
*Brahmanavagga: Brahmans
#383
chinda sotaṃ parakkamma, kāme panuda brāhmaṇa.
saṅkhārānaṃ khayaṃ ñatvā, akataññūsi brāhmaṇa.

Exert yourself, O holy man! Cut off the stream (of craving), and discard sense desires. Knowing the destruction of all the conditioned things, become, O holy man, the knower of the Uncreated (Nibbana)!
#384
yadā dvayesu dhammesu, pāragū hoti brāhmaṇo.
athassa sabbe saṃyogā, atthaṃ gacchanti jānato.

When a holy man has reached the summit of two paths (meditative concentration and insight), he knows the truth and all his fetters fall away.
#385
yassa pāraṃ apāraṃ vā, pārāpāraṃ na vijjati.
vītaddaraṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He for whom there is neither this shore nor the other shore, nor yet both, he who is free of cares and is unfettered - him do I call a holy man.
#386
jhāyiṃ virajamāsīnaṃ, katakiccamanāsavaṃ.
uttamatthamanuppattaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who is meditative, stainless and settled, whose work is done and who is free from cankers, having reached the highest goal - him do I call a holy man.
#387
divā tapati ādicco, rattimābhāti candimā.
sannaddho khattiyo tapati, jhāyī tapati brāhmaṇo.
atha sabbamahorattiṃ, buddho tapati tejasā.

The sun shines by day, the moon shines by night. The warrior shines in armor, the holy man shines in meditation. But the Buddha shines resplendent all day and all night.
#388
bāhitapāpoti brāhmaṇo, samacariyā samaṇoti vuccati.
pabbājayamattano malaṃ, tasmā 'pabbajito'ti vuccati.

Because he has discarded evil, he is called a holy man. Because he is serene in conduct, he is called a recluse. And because he has renounced his impurities, he is called a renunciate.
#389
na brāhmaṇassa pahareyya, nāssa muñcetha brāhmaṇo.
dhī brāhmaṇassa hantāraṃ, tato dhī yassa muñcati.

One should not strike a holy man, nor should a holy man, when struck, give way to anger. Shame on him who strikes a holy man, and more shame on him who gives way to anger.
#390
na brāhmaṇassetadakiñci seyyo, yadā nisedho manaso piyehi.
yato yato hiṃsamano nivattati, tato tato sammatimeva dukkhaṃ.

Nothing is better for a holy man than when he holds his mind back from what is endearing. To the extent the intent to harm wears away, to that extent does suffering subside.
#391
yassa kāyena vācāya, manasā natthi dukkaṭaṃ.
saṃvutaṃ tīhi ṭhānehi, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who does no evil in deed, word and thought, who is restrained in these three ways - him do I call a holy man.
#392
yamhā dhammaṃ vijāneyya, sammāsambuddhadesitaṃ.
sakkaccaṃ taṃ namasseyya, aggihuttaṃva brāhmaṇo.

Just as a brahman priest reveres his sacrificial fire, even so should one devoutly revere the person from whom one has learned the Dhamma taught by the Buddha.
#393
na jaṭāhi na gottena, na jaccā hoti brāhmaṇo.
yamhi saccañca dhammo ca, so sucī so ca brāhmaṇo.

Not by matted hair, nor by lineage, nor by birth does one become a holy man. But he in whom truth and righteousness exist - he is pure, he is a holy man.
#394
kiṃ te jaṭāhi dummedha, kiṃ te ajinasāṭiyā.
abbhantaraṃ te gahanaṃ, bāhiraṃ parimajjasi.

What is the use of your matted hair, O witless man? What of your garment of antelope's hide? Within you is the tangle (of passion); only outwardly do you cleanse yourself.
#395
paṃsukūladharaṃ jantuṃ, kisaṃ dhamanisanthataṃ.
ekaṃ vanasmiṃ jhāyantaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

The person who wears a robe made of rags, who is lean, with veins showing all over the body, and who meditates alone in the forest - him do I call a holy man.
#396
na cāhaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ brūmi, yonijaṃ mattisambhavaṃ.
bhovādi nāma so hoti, sace hoti sakiñcano.
akiñcanaṃ anādānaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

I do not call him a holy man because of his lineage or high-born mother. If he is full of impeding attachments, he is just a supercilious man. But who is free from impediments and clinging - him do I call a holy man.
#397
sabbasaṃyojanaṃ chetvā, yo ve na paritassati.
saṅgātigaṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, having cut off all fetters, trembles no more, who has overcome all attachments and is emancipated - him do I call a holy man.
#398
chetvā naddhiṃ varattañca, sandānaṃ sahanukkamaṃ.
ukkhittapalighaṃ buddhaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who has cut off the thong (of hatred), the band (of craving), and the rope (of false views), together with the appurtenances (latent evil tendencies), he who has removed the crossbar (of ignorance) and is enlightened - him do I call a holy man.
#399
akkosaṃ vadhabandhañca, aduṭṭho yo titikkhati.
khantībalaṃ balānīkaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who without resentment endures abuse, beating and punishment; whose power, real might, is patience - him do I call a holy man.
#400
akkodhanaṃ vatavantaṃ, sīlavantaṃ anussadaṃ.
dantaṃ antimasārīraṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who is free from anger, is devout, virtuous, without craving, self-subdued and bears his final body - him do I call a holy man.
#401
vāri pokkharapatteva, āraggeriva sāsapo.
yo na limpati kāmesu, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

Like water on a lotus leaf, or a mustard seed on the point of a needle, he who does not cling to sensual pleasures - him do I call a holy man.
#402
yo dukkhassa pajānāti, idheva khayamattano.
pannabhāraṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who in this very life realizes for himself the end of suffering, who has laid aside the burden and become emancipated - him do I call a holy man.
#403
gambhīrapaññaṃ medhāviṃ, maggāmaggassa kovidaṃ.
uttamatthamanuppattaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who has profound knowledge, who is wise, skilled in discerning the right or wrong path, and has reached the highest goal - him do I call a holy man.
#404
asaṃsaṭṭhaṃ gahaṭṭhehi, anāgārehi cūbhayaṃ.
anokasārimappicchaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who holds aloof from householders and ascetics alike, and wanders about with no fixed abode and but few wants - him do I call a holy man.
#405
nidhāya daṇḍaṃ bhūtesu, tasesu thāvaresu ca.
yo na hanti na ghāteti, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who has renounced violence towards all living beings, weak or strong, who neither kills nor causes others to kill - him do I call a holy man.
#406
aviruddhaṃ viruddhesu, attadaṇḍesu nibbutaṃ.
sādānesu anādānaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who is friendly amidst the hostile, peaceful amidst the violent, and unattached amidst the attached - him do I call a holy man.
#407
yassa rāgo ca doso ca, māno makkho ca pātito.
sāsaporiva āraggā, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He whose lust and hatred, pride and hypocrisy have fallen off like a mustard seed from the point of a needle - him do I call a holy man.
#408
akakkasaṃ viññāpaniṃ, giraṃ saccamudīraye.
yāya nābhisaje kañci, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who utters gentle, instructive and truthful words, who imprecates none - him do I call a holy man.
#409
yodha dīghaṃ va rassaṃ vā, aṇuṃ thūlaṃ subhāsubhaṃ.
loke adinnaṃ nādiyati, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who in this world takes nothing that is not given to him, be it long or short, small or big, good or bad - him do I call a holy man.
#410
āsā yassa na vijjanti, asmiṃ loke paramhi ca.
nirāsāsaṃ visaṃyuttaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who wants nothing of either this world or the next, who is desire-free and emancipated - him do I call a holy man.
#411
yassālayā na vijjanti, aññāya akathaṃkathī.
amatogadhamanuppattaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who has no attachment, who through perfect knowledge is free from doubts and has plunged into the Deathless - him do I call a holy man.
#412
yodha puññañca pāpañca, ubho saṅgamupaccagā.
asokaṃ virajaṃ suddhaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who in this world has transcended the ties of both merit and demerit, who is sorrowless, stainless and pure - him do I call a holy man.
#413
candaṃva vimalaṃ suddhaṃ, vippasannamanāvilaṃ.
nandībhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He, who, like the moon, is spotless and pure, serene and clear, who has destroyed the delight in existence - him do I call a holy man.
#414
yomaṃ palipathaṃ duggaṃ, saṃsāraṃ mohamaccagā.
tiṇṇo pāragato jhāyī, anejo akathaṃkathī.
anupādāya nibbuto, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, having traversed this miry, perilous and delusive round of existence, has crossed over and reached the other shore; who is meditative, calm, free from doubt, and, clinging to nothing, has attained to Nibbana - him do I call a holy man.
#415
yodha kāme pahantvāna, anāgāro paribbaje.
kāmabhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, having abandoned sensual pleasures, has renounced the household life and become a homeless one; has destroyed both sensual desire and continued existence - him do I call a holy man.
#416
yodha taṇhaṃ pahantvāna, anāgāro paribbaje.
taṇhābhavaparikkhīṇaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, having abandoned craving, has renounced the household life and become a homeless one, has destroyed both craving and continued existence - him do I call a holy man.
#417
hitvā mānusakaṃ yogaṃ, dibbaṃ yogaṃ upaccagā.
sabbayogavisaṃyuttaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, casting off human bonds and transcending heavenly ties, is wholly delivered of all bondages - him do I call a holy man.
#418
hitvā ratiñca aratiñca, sītibhūtaṃ nirūpadhiṃ.
sabbalokābhibhuṃ vīraṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who, having cast off likes and dislikes, has become tranquil, is rid of the substrata of existence and like a hero has conquered all the worlds - him do I call a holy man.
#419
cutiṃ yo vedi sattānaṃ, upapattiñca sabbaso.
asattaṃ sugataṃ buddhaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who in every way knows the death and rebirth of all beings, and is totally detached, blessed and enlightened - him do I call a holy man.
#420
yassa gatiṃ na jānanti, devā gandhabbamānusā.
khīṇāsavaṃ arahantaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He whose track no gods, no angels, no humans trace, the arahant who has destroyed all cankers - him do I call a holy man.
#421
yassa pure ca pacchā ca, majjhe ca natthi kiñcanaṃ.
akiñcanaṃ anādānaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who clings to nothing of the past, present and future, who has no attachment and holds on to nothing - him do I call a holy man.
#422
usabhaṃ pavaraṃ vīraṃ, mahesiṃ vijitāvinaṃ.
anejaṃ nhātakaṃ buddhaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He, the Noble, the Excellent, the Heroic, the Great Sage, the Conqueror, the Passionless, the Pure, the Enlightened one - him do I call a holy man.
#423
pubbenivāsaṃ yo vedi, saggāpāyañca passati,
atho jātikkhayaṃ patto, abhiññāvosito muni.
sabbavositavosānaṃ, tamahaṃ brūmi brāhmaṇaṃ.

He who knows his former births, who sees heaven and hell, who has reached the end of births and attained to the perfection of insight, the sage who has reached the summit of spiritual excellence - him do I call a holy man.
